ve to and from school . 
Students and parents have the responsibility to know and respect the 
rules affecting student drivers. Parking regulations are strictly enforced . 
Suspension of driving privileges, issuing of parking tickets through the 
Troy Police Department, towing of vehicles and/or suspension of driving 
privileges may occur when violations of these regulations occur. The 
Student Code of Conduct is in effect during school-related activities that 
involve student drivers (field trips, commuting during school hours, etc.)  
Annually, student drivers must complete vehicle registration cards and 
submit a fee for each vehicle driven to school.  Students must possess a 
valid dri ver’s license to purchase a parking tag.  Proof of vehicle 
registration and insurance is required for all vehicles parked on campus.  
Rules and Regulations: 
1. Students must register any and all vehicles driven  to school . A 
per veh icle parking fee will be assessed, and a parking 
identification tag will be issued . Parking identification tags are  
non-transferable. There will be a fee for replacement of a tag for 
any reason.  
2. All vehicles must be parked on the school grounds in the  
assigned lot and all cars must display the proper identification. 
Misuse of parking identification tags may result in loss of 
driving privileges or other disciplinary consequences.  
3. All students must be licensed and covered by insurance . The 
Troy School District is not responsible for either the vehicle or its 
contents.   
142
-31- 
CHAPTER 4 
CHAPTER 4 
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR STUDENT DRIVERS 
4. Students are not allowed to loiter or revisit in or around  the 
vehicle once it has been parked.  
5. Speed on school property may not be in excess of fifteen miles 
per hour. Reckless driving of a ny nature, i.e., squealing tires, 
donut, jumping curbs, etc., is not allowed.   
6. Vehicles are not be used as lockers for books or clothing . 
Students may not be in the parking lot during the school day 
without written permission from a school administrator or 
designee.  
7. Vehicles must be parked in accordance with pavement 
markings.  
8. Students may not leave the school grounds at lunch in their 
vehicle. Students leaving school legally, i.e., OTC, Co -op, may 
not take other students with them.  
9. Student vehicles may be subject to search if there is reasonable  
suspicion to believe drugs, alcohol, stolen property or other 
property prohibited by law or this handbook are present in that 
vehicle.  
10. Bus transportation is pr ovided for all students who have  classes 
at both high schools . Students are permitted to drive between 
Troy High School and Athens High School for classes with 
special permission from building administration.  
11. Excessive tardiness to 1st hour may  result in loss of driving  
privileges.   
12. There will be no refund of parking fees during loss of driving  
privileges. 
13. Students must comply with traffic flow rules for entry and exit 
to the school campus.  Vehicles must be parke d in designated 
student lots unl ess expres sly permitted by a building 
administrator. 
DISCIPLINE PROCEDURE: 
 First administrative contact (one or more of the following): 
1. Parent notification 
2. Reprimand 
3. Suspension of driving privileges up to ten days 
143
-32- 
CHAPTER 4 
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR STUDENT DRIVERS 
4. Behavioral contract  
5. Police notification or refer ral to a professional agency  as 
appropriate.  
6. Restitution/restoration as applicable. 
 Subsequent administrative contact (one or more of the following): 
1. Parent notification 
2. Reprimand 
3. Suspension of driving privileges up to one year 
4. Behavioral contract  
5. Police notification or referral to a professional agency as 
appropriate. 
6. Restitution/restoration as applicable. 
144
-33- 
CHAPTER 5 
TECHNOLOGY 
     _______________________________ 
 TECHNOLOGY 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to set forth expectations for appropriate use 
of existing and emerging technologies which students may possess, 
including but not limited to cell phones, digital picture video cameras 
and/or camera phones, personal digital  assistant (PDAs), iPods, MP3s, 
and other personal electronic devices capable of transmitting data or 
images. It is the responsibility of every student to know this policy and 
to conduct his or her activities accordingly. 
Michigan law ( 380.1303) allows lo cal school boards to determine the 
policy on the use and possession of cellular phones (cell phones) and 
other electronic signaling devices such as pagers on school campuses.  
The TSD cell phone policy is provided to balance considerations of 
student safet y and well -being with the need to maintain a learning 
environment free from distractions. 
Students who possess and/or use s uch devices at school or school –
sponsored events shall demonstrate the greatest respect for the 
educational environment and the righ ts and privacy of all individuals 
within the school community. 
The district shall not be liable for theft, loss, damage, or misuse of any 
electronic devices brought to school by a student. 
In order to use TSD provided technology equipment and devices and  
access the TSD wired or wireless networks, students must comply with 
the terms of the District’s Technology Acceptable Use Policy  available 
145
-34- 
CHAPTER 5 
CHAPTER 5 
TECHNOLOGY 
via the TSD home website p age.  Students violating the terms of that 
agreement may face disciplinary action including the loss of technology 
privileges.   Unapproved or prohibited use of district computers or  other 
technology includes: 
a) Disregarding the privacy of other users, such  as using or 
attempting to use or learn other users’ passwords; 
b) Unauthorized copying, changing, reading, accessing or 
attempting to access or using other users’ files; 
c) Gaining or attempting to gain unauthorized access to district 
equipment, systems, programs, files or other users’ accounts;  
d) Introducing or attempting to introduce a virus  or malware into 
any district equipment, systems, programs or files; 
e) Using or attempting to use district equipment, systems programs 
or files to disturb or harass others; and 
f) Damaging or attempting to damage any district equipment, 
systems, programs or files. 
g) Other behavior designed to obviate District technology controls, 
limit District technology functionality or damage District 
technology systems. 
Cell Phones/Electronic Communication, Listening Devices: 
a) Visible or audible detection of any electronic, communication 
listening device is prohibited during the school day by Troy 
School District policy . Any exception must be approved by the 
faculty or school administration . If confiscated, devices must be 
picked up in the office. Disciplinary measures are as follows: 
 1st offense: Confiscation/student pick -up, Assistant 
 Principal’s Office 
 2nd offense:  Confiscation/administrative discretion 
b) The use of any and all devices must be for school purposes . 
Permission to use such items at TSD must be given by the faculty 
or school administration and will be approved on a class by class 
basis for academic purposes . Unauthorized use (actual use of 
said device) for voice, text , picture, numerical message, etc. 
146
-35- 
CHAPTER 5 
TECHNOLOGY 
outside pre -approved periods, will result in immediate out of 
school suspensions and parent pick up of the device.  
c) Photographing, disseminating, transferring or sharing of 
offensive, obscene, pornographic or otherwise illegal images 
may constitute a crime and will be reported to law enforcement 
which may result in arrest, prosecution, and inclusion, on sex 
offender registries. 
Respect for Privacy Rights 
1.       Students shall not photograph, audiotape, or videotape other 
individuals at school or at school -sponsored events without their 
knowledge or consent, except for activities considered to be in 
the public arena such as active participants in sporting events or 
public performances. 
2.       Students shall not e -mail, post to the internet, or otherwise 
electronically transmit images of other individuals taken at 
school without their expressed written consent. 
3.       Use of cellular phones or other personal electronic devices is 
strictly prohibited in locker rooms and restrooms.  
147
-36- 
CHAPTER 6 
BULLYING AND HARASSMENT 
     _______________________________ 
 BULLYING AND HARASSMENT 
The purpose of this policy is to create and maintain a positive learning 
environment, and to promote understanding and respect for  all students. 
Troy School District will not tolerate bullying and harassment . Any 
student of the Troy School District who believes that he/she has been 
bullied or harassed shall immediately report his or her complaint to the 
building principal. The report will be promptly investigated. 
Understanding bullying is complicated by the fact that a young person 
can be a bully, a victim or both a bully and a victim . Not all taunting, 
teasing and fighting among schoolchildren constitutes bullying. Bullying 
entails repeated acts by someone perceived as physically or 
psychologically more powerful . Bullying, like other forms of aggressive 
and violent behaviors, interferes with both a school’s ability to educate  
its students and a student’s ability to learn. 
Definition 
Bullying means: any written, verbal, or physical act, including 
cyberbullying, that is intended or is likely to cause harm to another 
student by doing any of the following: 
• Substantially interfering with another student’s educational 
opportunities or benefits; 
• Affecting another student’s ability to participate or benefit from 
school by putting the student in fear of physical harm or by 
causing emotional distress; 
• Having a detrimental effect on a student ’s physical or mental 
health; 
148
-37- 
CHAPTER 6 
CHAPTER 6 
BULLYING AND HARASSMENT 
• Causing a substantial  disruption with the orderly operation of 
school. 
Bullying includes cyberbullying, or bullying done through any electronic 
communication.  Types of bullying may include but are not limited to: 
• Verbal bullying, including derogatory comments and  bad 
names. 
o Physical bullying such as hitting, kicking, shoving and  
spitting; 
o Having money or other things taken or damaged by  
students who bully; 
o Being threatened or being forced to do things by  
students who bully. 
• Cyberbullying (via cell phone or internet). 
DEFINITION OF CYBERBULLYING 
Cyberbullying is any t ype of harassment or bullying (i.e., teasing, telling 
lies, making fun of someone, making rude or mean comments, spreading 
rumors, or making threatening or aggressive comments) that occurs 
through e-mail, a chat room, instant messaging, any website (including 
blogs), text messaging, videos, or pictures posted on websites or sent 
through cell phones. 
Cyberbullying differs from traditional bullying.  
• It can be  accessible by many peop le (depending on the forum) 
and can occur at any time both at school and at home.  
• Messages/images can be distributed to a wide audience very 
quickly.  
• Cyberbullying is often anonymous, making it difficult to identify 
the perpetrator and therefore may en courage youth to engage in 
behavior that they wouldn’t do face-to-face.  
• Youth may be nervous to report cyberbullying because they fear 
adults will limit their access to technology. 
149
-38- 
CHAPTER 6 
BULLYING AND HARASSMENT 
• Bystanders and witnesses to cyberbullying are anonymous, 
viewing the harm ful material on a website but not dealing with 
it face-to-face. 
TYPES OF CYBERBULLYING 
Types of cyberbullying may include but are not limited to: 
• Flaming:  Online fights using electronic messages with 
inappropriate and/or vulgar language 
• Harassment:  Repeatedly sending offen sive, rude and insulting 
messages 
• Cyber stalking :  Repeatedly sending messages that include 
threats of harm or are highly inti midating. Engaging in other 
online activities that make a person afraid for his or her own 
safety 
• Denigration:  Putting someone do wn online; sending or posting 
cruel gossip or rumors about a person to damage his or her 
reputation or friendships 
• Impersonation:  Pretending to be someone else and sending or 
posting material online that makes that person look bad, gets 
that person in tro uble or danger, or damages that person’s 
reputation or friendships 
• Outing and Trickery:  Sharing someone’s secret or embarrassing 
information online ; t ricking someone into revealing secrets or 
embarrassing information which is then shared online 
• Exclusion:  Willfully excluding someone from an online group, 
like a ‘buddy list’ 
DEFINITION OF HARASSMENT 
Harassing conduct may take many forms, including verbal acts and 
name-calling; graphic and written statements, which may includ e use of 
cell phones or the internet; or other conduct that may be physically 
threatening, harmful or humiliating .  Harassment creates a hostile 
environment when the conduct is sufficiently severe, pervasive or 
persistent so as to interfere with or limit a student’s ability to participate 
150
-39- 
CHAPTER 6 
BULLYING AND HARASSMENT 
in or benefit from the services, activities or opportunities offered by a 
school.  
Sexual harassment is unwelc ome conduct of a sexual nature, which can 
include unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors or other 
verbal, nonverbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature.  Sexual 
harassment includes unwelcome sexual flirtations, advances or 
propositions, i mproper sexual comments, verbal abuse of a sexual 
nature, subtle pressure or requests for sexual activities, unnecessary 
touching  of an  individual, graphic or  verbal  commentaries  about  an 
individual's body, touching of a sexual nature, sexually degrading words 
used to describe an individual, calling students sexually charged names , 
a display of sexually suggestive objects or pictures, sexually explicit or 
offensive jokes, physical assault, or otherwise creating an intimidating, 
hostile or offensive educational learning environment. 
151
-40- 
CHAPTER 8 
CONFISCATED MATERIALS 
     _______________________________ 
 PHYSICAL RESTRAINT & SECLUSION 
The use of physical force in any form, including but not limited to 
corporal punishment, is prohibited. 
Seclusion and/or restraint shall only be used in an emergency situation, 
and, then, only in accordance with the Michigan Revised School Code 
(MCL 380.1307) and the Board of Education in its policies.  The use of 
seclusion and restraint in the Troy School District shall accomplish the 
following objectives:  
• Promote the care, safety, welfare, and security of the school 
community and the dignity of each pupil.  
• Encourage the use of proactive, effective, evidence- and 
research-based strategies and best practices to reduce the 
occurrence of challenging behaviors, eliminate the use of 
seclusion and restraint, and increase meaningful instructional 
time for all pupils. 
• Ensure that seclusion and physical restraint are used only as a 
last resort in an emergency situation and are subject to diligent 
assessment, monitoring, documentation, and reporting by 
trained personnel.  
Physical restraint does not include: 
• Actions necessary to break up a fight; 
• Actions necessary to take a weapon away from a student; 
• Actions necessary to stop a physical assault; 
• Brief holding by an adult to calm or comfort; 
• The minimum contact necessary  to physically escort a student 
from one area to another; 
152
-41- 
CHAPTER 7 
CHAPTER 8 
CONFISCATED MATERIALS 
• Holding a student for a brief time in order to prevent an 
impulsive behavior that threatens the student’s immediate 
safety (e.g., running in front of a car). 
“Corporal punishment” is defined a s “th e deliberate infliction of 
physical pain by hitting, paddling, spanking, slappi ng, or any other 
physical force used as a means of discipline.” MCL 380.1312(1). 
153
-42- 
CHAPTER 8 
CONFISCATED MATERIALS 
     _______________________________ 
 CONFISCATED MATERIALS 
Any materials, supplie s, or other objects deemed to be inappropriate at 
school or in the classroom may be confiscated by school personnel.  
The return of confiscated items will be subject to the judgment of 
individual building administrators and in conjunction with law 
enforcement when necessary. 
154
-43- 
CHAPTER 8 
CHAPTER 9 
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION/SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY 
     _______________________________ 
 ANTI-DISCRIMINATION/  
SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY 
The Troy School District will not tolerate unlawful discrimination, 
harassment, or bullying . Any student of the Troy School Dist rict who 
believes that he/she has been discriminated against, denied a benefit, or 
excluded from participation in any district educational program or 
activity on the basis of sex (including sexual harassment, as discussed 
below), race, color, religion, nat ional origin, age, height, weight, marital 
status, ancestry, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity or 
expression, or mental, physical or sensory disability or physical  
characteristic should immediately report his or her complaint to the 
building principal or the assistant/deputy superintendent. The complaint 
will be promptly investigated.  
Sexual harassment of students by other students or by employees of the 
district is unlawful and strictly prohibited . It is the policy of this school 
district that all conta ct between students, teachers or other adult 
employees of this district reflect respect for the individual student and be 
conducive to creating a stable and positive learning environment. 
Sexual harassment is unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature, which ca n 
include unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors or other 
verbal, nonverbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature.  Sexual 
harassment includes unwelcome sexual flirtations, advances or 
propositions, improper sexual comments, verbal abuse of  a sexual 
nature, subtle pressure or requests for sexual activities, unnecessary 
touching  of an  individual, graphic or  verbal  commentaries  about  an 
individual's body, touching of a sexual nature, sexually degrading words 
used to describe an individua l, calling students sexually charged names , 
a display of sexually suggestive objects or pictures, sexually explicit or 
155
-44- 
CHAPTER 9 
CHAPTER 9 
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION/SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY 
offensive jokes, physical assault, or otherwise creating an intimidating, 
hostile or offensive educational learning environment. 
If a student has concerns about the nature of any conduct or physical 
contact by an adult employed by this district, by a fellow student, or by a 
member of the public, the student should immediately repor t this 
concern to a building administrator, as well as to the student's parent or 
guardian. 
Students are encouraged to report any conduct or contact that makes 
them feel uncomfortable, is bothersome, or is contrary to a stable, 
positive learning environment. 
The district shall  investigate all such reports immediately . Retaliation by 
a student or employee against a student for filing a complaint of sexual 
harassment is strictly prohibited . Anyone found to have engaged in 
sexual harassment or retaliation in  violation of this policy will be subject 
to appropriate disciplinary action . For students, such discipline could 
range from verbal or written warnings to suspension or expulsion.  
All such reports sha ll be handled confidentially to avoid embarrassment 
and to protect the student making the report . Complaints constituting 
child abuse shall be reported to the Department of Social Services as 
required by law. 
156
-45- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
   _______________________________ 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
School rules come from many sources, including state and federal laws, 
Board of Education policies, and administration guidelines . The aim of 
this chapter is to provide school personnel, parents, students and other 
members of the community with a clear understanding  of the rules and 
the resulting disciplinary actions for violations of those rules.  
This chapter lists, categorizes and defines certain violations that disrupt 
the school environment and/or the instructional process, and specifies 
disciplinary actions whi ch are to be taken by the principal . A major 
consideration of the Code of Student Conduct is to identify appropriate 
disciplinary actions to bring about positive student behavior . The 
severity and frequency of the misbehavior is considered in defining 
appropriate disciplinary action. 
The principal shall in all cases conduct an investigation deemed 
reasonable under the circumstances to confirm that the charged offense 
has, in fact, been committed . The Code of Student Conduct shall not be 
interpreted or appl ied in a manner that would violate a student's 
constitutional rights. 
The administration reserves the right to establish fair and reasonable 
rules and regulations for circumstances that may not be specifically 
covered in this handbook. The lists of violations on the following pages 
are not all-inclusive, but only representative and illustrative . A student 
committing an improper act of misconduct which does not happen to 
be specifically listed is  subject to disciplinary action. In all cases, rules 
and regulations, and possible co nsequences shall be as consistent as 
possible with previously established rules, regulations, and 
consequences for similar incidents . Matters omitted from this 
handbook should not b e interpreted as a limitation on the scope of the 
157
-46- 
CHAPTER 10 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
District’s authority and the District ’s responsibility to maintain order 
and provide a safe learning environment for all students .  It should be 
noted that violations are cumulative and consequences for cumulative 
violations may be more severe. Violations ar e not disciplined 
independently. For example, for a Level I violation, if a student was 
disciplined for cutting class one week and then was disciplined the next 
week for loitering, the loitering may be considered as a second 
administrative contact. 
These rules and policies apply to any student who is on school property, 
who is in attendance at school or at any school -sponsored activity 
whether on or off campus, or whose conduct at any time or place directly 
interferes with the operations, discipline, or ge neral welfare of the 
school, students and staff.  
RESTORATIVE DISCIPLINE PRACTICES  
A major consideration of the Code of Conduct is to identify appropriate 
disciplinary actions that will bring about positive student behavior . 
Restorative Discipline focuses on the harms, needs and causes of student 
behavior, not just the breaking of rules and dispensing of punishment . 
Restorative discipline attempts to provide students with an opportunity 
to be accountable for the harm caused as well as the opportunity to 
repair the harm . Students are empowered to help resolve conflict and 
maintain an environment where the work of the school can happen . The 
goal of restorative discipline is to provide students an opportunity to 
learn to think differently about harm, to deal  with conflict in peaceful 
and creative ways, to address accountability and responsibility, to focus 
on one another’s humanity and to problem -solve in terms of community 
and collaboration. 
Student violators of the Code of Conduct may have the opportunity to 
engage in restorative practices as a consequence of their inappropriate 
behavior, as facilitated by school officials.  It is important that any 
student engaging in restorative practices freely admit to any wrongdoing 
and express contrition for their act ions to the offended parties.  
Restorative practices developed in response to a Code of Conduct 
158
-47- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
violation may include but are not limited to the following productive 
activities: 
• Restitution 
• Alternative suspension including In-School 
Suspension/Detention  
• Apology for offense (both written and verbal) 
• Participation in diversion programs 
• Community service activities 
• Outreach and awareness activities 
• Course of study, book study, or other applied learning 
experience 
• Behavior plan or behavior contract 
• Participation in counseling in and out of school 
• Engage in in agency and community supports,  
• Student-to-student mediation 
Restorative practices could also serve to supplement a lower -term 
suspension versus simply in lieu of a suspension.  All restorative practice 
plans should include a timeline with term of completion specified.  
STUDENTS WHO HAVE COMMITTED MISCONDUCT IN OTHER 
SCHOOLS   
An otherwise eligible resident who is alleged by school authorities to 
have engaged in misconduct in another school district whic h would have 
resulted in the student’s suspension or expulsion if the student had 
attended Troy School District may be subject to suspension or expulsion 
from Troy School District pursuant to the Code of Student Conduct. 
In most situations, a  school dist rict administrator will be involved in 
enforcing the Code of Student Conduct . However, a teacher may 
suspend a student from his/her teacher's class, subject, or activity for up 
to one day in accordance with state law if: 1) the student engages in 
behavior so unruly, disruptive, or abusive that it significantly interferes 
with the teacher's ability to effectively teach the class, subject, or activity, 
or 2) the student's behavior significantly interferes with the ability of 
other students to lear n. Such teacher -imposed suspensions are also 
159
-48- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
referred to as SNAP suspensions . For other student misconduct, the 
teacher will handle the matter in accordance with the standard 
disciplinary process used in the school building. 
DISCIPLINING STUDENTS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS 
Suspension and Expulsion of Student s Receiving or 
Otherwise Eligible for Special Education or Section 504 
Services 
A student previously identified under state and federal regulations as 
eligible for special education  or under Section 504  of the Rehabilitation 
Act is entitled to consideration of his/her disability in student 
disciplinary procedures . School personnel and/or parents who have 
questions regarding any issues are advised to consult with the district 
Director of Special Education or Section 504 Coordinator. 
See the glossary at the end of this handbook for definitions of various 
terms used herein. 
SUSPENSION AND EXPULSION DEFINITIONS 
The State of Michigan School Code (MCL 380.1310) specifically defines 
the terms “expel” and “suspend” to mean the following: 
“Expel” means to exclude a pupil from school for disciplinary 
reasons for a period of 60 or more school days.  
“Suspend” means to exclude a pupil from school for 
disciplinary reasons for a period of fewer than 60 school days.  
These definitions shall apply to references to suspend and expel 
throughout the Code of Conduct document. 
160
-49- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
LEVEL I VIOLATIONS 
A Level I violation is considered to be any behavior which disrupts or 
interferes with the effective and safe functioning of the school but is not 
as serious as a Level II or Level III violation.  
Level I violations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Class Skipping/Cutting and Tardies 
Unexcused absence from a class for all or part of a class period. 
Disruptive Behavior 
Inappropriate language, mild profanity,  gestures or actions which 
produce distractions, frictions, or disturba nces that interfere with the 
effective functioning or safety of the staff, students, or the school. 
Inappropriate Displays of Affection 
Engaging in acts or demonstration of inappropriate affection toward or 
with another person in public , including physical acts as well as signs 
and gestures.  
Inappropriate Dress 
As we prepare our students for the world of work and promote learning 
in the school environment, students are expected to dress in compliance 
with the following guidelines. 
• No bare midriffs are permitted. Shirts and tops must meet the 
waist line of jeans, pants, skirts or shorts (the “bottom of the top” 
should remain in contact with the “top of the bottom”). 
• No backless or strapless tops are allowed. 
• No see-through or otherwise revealing clothing is allowed. 
• Shoes must be worn at all times. 
• Jeans, pants, skirts or shorts must provide adequate coverage 
and be of reasonable length. 
• Tops and bottoms must conceal all undergarments. 
• Non-prescription sunglasses should not be worn in the school 
environment. 
161
-50- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
• Chains, handcuffs, and other metal paraphernalia on clothing 
are prohibited. 
• Hats, b andanas, hoods and other head coverings are not to be 
worn in school. 
• Clothing must not display inappropriate slogans and/or graphics 
including those related to or depicting behavior prohibited in the 
Code of Conduct. 
Leaving School without Authorization  
The Troy School District operates a closed campus, i.e., one in which all 
students must remain on the school site during the school day, unless 
authorized permission to leave is granted from the attendance office or 
principal. 
Misuse of Technology  
Classroom technology use, personal or District, shall be governed by 
teachers and administrators. See Chapter 5 for additional misuse 
information. 
Inappropriate Use of Cell Phone 
No student shall use or display smart phones, cellular phones, or other 
devices w ith inbound/outbound communication capabilities on school 
property during normal school hours, unless authorized by a teacher or 
administrator.   
Tardiness 
Tardiness occurs when students are not in their classroom and/or  seats 
when the class is scheduled to begin. 
Truancy 
Truancy is defined as a bsence from school without au thorization; failure 
to follow proper attendance check -in and check-out procedures. Regular 
attendance at school and prompt arriva l to all classes and scheduled 
activities is the responsibility of both the students and parent s. (MCL 
380.1561). 
162
-51- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
DISCIPLINE PROCEDURE - LEVEL I VIOLATIONS 
First and subsequent violations: administrative contacts  (one or more 
of the following): 
1. Parent notification 
2. Reprimand 
3. Detention 
4. Behavioral contract/disciplinary probation 
5. Suspension (not to exceed three days) 
6. Suspension from activities during or after the school day  
7. Referral to an outside agency, if appropriate 
8. For technology infractions – loss of password and  technology 
privileges, as determined by administration. 
9. Restorative practices where applicable 
Persistent disobedience with respect to Level I violations may result in 
a recommendation for suspension, pending a hearing for removal from 
school for the remainder of the semester or school year. 
LEVEL II VIOLATIONS 
A Level II violation is any behavior which seriously disrupts or interferes 
with the effective functioning or learning environment of the school but 
is not as serious as a Level III violation.  
Level II violations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Academic Misconduct 
Plagiarizing, cheating, including copying or supplying class work, 
homework, tests, etc. for personal benefit, or gaining unauthorized 
access to material through such behavior as going into a teacher's file, 
paper or electronic, or looking through a teacher's desk. 
Assault or Battery/Intimidation/Incitement 
A threat or attempt to do harm to another without a weapon, with or 
without physical contact and without injury, or the act of promoting or 
163
-52- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
encouraging acts of violence . Students are expected to treat each other in 
a respectful manner . Engaging in any type of verbal abuse will not be 
tolerated. A student shall not make annoying nuisance, vulgar and/or 
obscene communications, verbally, in writing, or by gestures to other 
students. 
Bullying/Cyberbullying 
See Chapter 6 for detailed information. 
Disruption of the Educational Process 
This includes b ehavior which seriously disrupts any school activity or 
the orderly and safe operation of the school  while the following acts are 
not intended to be exclusive, they il lustrate the kinds of offenses 
encompassed within the rule,  however, any conduct which causes 
disruption, or interferes with the education process is forbidden, (i.e., 
running, jumping, ho rseplay including shouting, yelling, screaming,  of 
engaging another student physically with or without intent to harm.  
Fighting 
Aggressive physical contact between two or more individuals. 
Flammable Materials – Use or Possession 
The use or possession of devices made from explosive or flammable 
materials (fireworks include Class B and Class C fireworks as identified 
by state law). 
Forgery/Giving False Information or Lying 
Lying and/or intentional misreprese ntation of information given to 
school district personnel. 
Gambling 
Participation in or organization of games of chance for money, other 
things of value and/or inappropriate conduct. 
164
-53- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
Harassment 
Verbal acts a nd name-calling; graphic and written statements, which 
may include use of cell phones or the internet; or other conduct that m ay 
be physically threatening, harmful or humiliating . Harassment based on 
race, color, national origin, sex or disability  also violates the civil rights 
of victims. 
Inappropriate Use of Technology Resources 
Students using school technology resource s as defined in this guide for 
illegal, inappropriate, or obscene purposes ; sharing or unauthorized u se 
of passwords, accessing, controlling or disabling , vandalizing or 
misappropriating devices or services of the district or any third party or 
otherwise in violation of the Student Acceptable Use Policy.  See Chapter 
5 for additional information. 
Insubordination 
Verbal or non -verbal refusal to comply with a reasonable request or 
directive. This includes failing to complete an assigned disciplinary 
action. 
Loitering 
The act of being in an unauthorized place, lingering in or about school 
property, or refus ing to leave when directed to do so by school 
personnel. A student remaining or lingering on school property without 
staff supervision for more than 30 minutes after final dismissal without a 
legitimate purpose or prior permission from Administration  is 
considered to be loitering . Violations may result in trespassing charges 
and or school discipline.  
Sexting 
The act of electronically sending to another person or receiving sexually 
explicit text messages, photographs, graphic images and/or videos. 
“Sexting” is not only an inappropriate and forbidden behavior; it also 
violates many state and local laws.  
Students and their parents need to be aware of the possible criminal 
consequences and penalties for possessing, producing, and 
165
-54- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
disseminating pornographic and/or sexually explicit material. Violations 
may carry felony charges and label the youth as a sex offender .  Parents 
and students should understand that once a picture of a video is on the 
internet, it may be copied hundreds if not thousands of times.  
All students who engage in sexting will be referred to police and/or 
other appropriate agencies. 
Smoking, Possession or Use of Tobacco Products , E -
Cigarettes, Electronic Vapor Inhalation Devices  and Oils , 
and/or Possession of Drug Paraphernalia 
Possession, holding, smoking, sale or transfer of any tobacco prod ucts or 
any other use or possession of tobacco products (i.e., cigars,  pipes, 
cigarettes, snuff or chewing tobacco) or e-cigarettes is prohibited.  
E-cigarettes and vapor inhalation devices shall in clude any and all 
recreational inhalation devices including but not limited to the brands 
V2, Juul, E -Kit, Halo, Aspire, and Mig .  Mostly all electronic vapor 
inhalation devices include a batter, atomizer, and e -liquid (juice  or oil ).  
Individual parts of electronic devices including only the e -liquid shall 
not be possessed and are also prohibited. 
Possession of drug paraphernalia, e.g., bongs, pipes, etc., is prohibited. 
Stealing, Possession or Transfer of Property of Others  
(Value Under $100) 
The act o f taking possession or transferring property of another, i.e., a  
student, adult, or the school without the consent of the owner (or 
copyright holder), when the property is worth less than $100. 
Trespassing 
The act of being in or about a school building wi thout having a 
legitimate reason or authorized permission (this includes suspended 
students). 
166
-55- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
Vandalism (Value Under $100) 
The deliberate or negligent  destruction, defacing or damaging of school 
property or the property of others. 
Vulgarity/Indecency 
Written or spoken language, sign l anguage, gestures, apparel, or actions, 
etc., that are offensive, obscene or vulgar. 
DISCIPLINE PROCEDURE - LEVEL II VIOLATIONS 
First offense: administrative contact (one or more of the following): 
1. Parent notification 
2. Reprimand 
3. Maximum five-day suspension 
4. Behavioral contract/disciplinary probation 
5. Police notification or referral to a professional agency  
6. Restitution/restoration  
7. Technology – loss of password/technology privileges for a 
semester 
8. Restorative practices where applicable 
Second administrative contact (one or more of the following): 
1. Parent notification 
2. Reprimand  
3. Maximum seven-day suspension 
4. Behavioral contract/disciplinary probation 
5. Police noti fication or referral to a professional agency  as 
appropriate 
6. Restitution/restoration as applicable 
7. Technology – loss of password/technology privileges for the 
school year 
8. Restorative practices where applicable 
 Subsequent administrative contact s (one or m ore of the 
 following): 
1. Parent notification 
167
-56- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
2. Reprimand 
3. Suspension pending a hearing 
4. Ten-day suspension or the removal from school for remainder of 
school year 
5. Police notification or referral to a professional agency as 
appropriate 
6. Recommendation for expulsion  
7. Restitution/restoration as applicable 
8. Technology – permanent loss of technology privileges 
9. Restorative practices where applicable 
Persistent disobedience with respect to Level II violations will result 
in a recommendation for suspension, pending a he aring for removal 
from school for the remainder of the semester or school year.  
LEVEL III VIOLATIONS 
A Level III violation is considered to be any behavior of an aggravated 
nature, including a Level I or Level II violation  of a more serious  nature, 
which seriously disrupts or interferes with the effective and safe 
functioning of the school. 
Level III violations include, but are not limited to, the following:  
Aggravated Assault and Battery 
Striking or unlawful touching of a victim: 1) without a weapon and 
infliction of an injury; 2) with a we apon or other object used as a 
weapon; or 3) attempt to use a weapon. 
Arson 
Any act utilizing unauthorized f ire, smoke or explosives wh ich presents 
a risk of danger to life or property. 
Breaking and Entering 
Breaking into and/or entering any school building, facility, office, room, 
storage space or other enclosure without authority to do so. 
168
-57- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
Bullying/Cyberbullying (Refer to Chapter 6) 
Bullying means: any written, verbal, or physical act, including 
cyberbullying, that is intended or is likely to cause harm to another 
student by doing any of the following: 
• Substantially interfering with another student’s educational 
opportunities or benefits; 
• Affecting another student’s ability to participate or benefit from 
school by putting the student in fear of physical harm or by causing 
emotional distress; 
• Having a detrimental effect on a student’s physical or mental health;  
causing a substantial disruption with the orderly operation of school. 
Cyberbullying is  any type of bullying (i.e., teasing, telling lies, making 
fun of someone, making rude or mean comments, spreading rumors or 
making threatening or aggressive comments) that occurs through e -mail, 
a chat room, instant messaging, any website (i ncluding blogs), text 
messaging, videos, or pictures posted on websites or sent through cell 
phones. 
Cyberbullying that occurs during school hours or on school property  is 
subject to disciplinary act ion by the Troy School District (see Chapter 6).   
Furthermore, cy berbullying initiated outside of  school hours or off 
school property that causes a material disruption to academic and 
extracurricular learning environments may result in disciplinary action 
and referral to local police authorities. 
False Alarm, Bomb Threat, or Tampering with any 
Fire Safety Device (this includes "911" calls) 
The deliberate or intentional act of setting off a false alarm, calling in or 
writing a bomb threat or tampering with any fire safety device. 
Felonious Assault 
Striking with a weapon with the intent to inflict bodily harm or the 
attempt to do so. 
169
-58- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
Fighting 
Aggressive physical contact between two or more individuals. 
Harassment 
Harassing conduct may take many forms, including verbal acts and 
name-calling; graphic and  written statements, which may include use of 
cell phones or the internet; or other conduct that may be physically 
threatening, harmful or humiliating.  
Inappropriate Use of Technology Resources 
Using technology resources as defined in this guide fo r aggravated 
illegal, inappropriate, or obscene purposes or otherwise in violation of 
the Student Acceptable Use Policy. 
Possession or Concealment of Weapon or Dangerous 
Instrument 
The possession or conc ealment of any kind of weapon or dangerous 
instrument, device, materials, knife, gun, metal knuckles, tools, mace, 
pepper gas, etc., or any other item deemed to be a weapon . This also 
includes look-alike weapons. 
Robbery or Extortion 
The act of attempting  to ob tain money, goods, services or information 
from another by force of the threat of force or by coercion. 
Stealing, Possession, or Transfer of Property of Others  
(Value $100 or More) 
The act of taking possession or transferring property of a nother without 
the consent of the owner (or copyright holder), when the property is 
worth $100 or more. 
Use, Possession, Selling, Distribution, or Under the 
Influence of Drugs or Alcohol** 
The possession on one's person or among one's  belongings, or the direct 
or indirect selling, distribution or use of illegal substances, including, but 
170
-59- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
not limited to, alcohol, and marijuana, and controlled substances as 
defined by law, or imitation (counterfeit) con trolled substances which 
have not been specifically prescribed for the student by a physician.   
Vandalism (Value Over $100) 
The deliberate or negligent  destruction, defacing or damaging of 
property, of another, i.e., student, adult, or the school.  
DISCIPLINE PROCEDURE - LEVEL III VIOLATIONS 
 First and subsequent administrative contact: 
1. Parent notification 
2. Suspension pending a hearing 
3. Behavioral contract/disciplinary contract (optional) 
4. Report or complaint filed with the appropriate policy agency  as 
appropriate 
5. Restitution/restoration (if applicable) 
6. Recommendation for removal from school for a  minimum of ten 
days, the remainder of the school year (if appropriate),  or 
recommendation for expulsion (if appropriate)  
7. Technology – permanent loss of privileges. 
8. Restorative practices where applicable  
** In situations involving illegal substance possession or use, 
administrators have latitude to re duce the term of the suspension for a 
student’s first offense by requiring the student’s completion of an illegal 
substance prevention educational program  and/or a community 
sponsored criminal diversion program .  In such cases, administrators 
will work collaboratively with students and parents to outlin e the 
supplemental educational and participation r equirements and the 
timeline for completion. 
STATUTORY VIOLATIONS 
The Revised School Code provides for a student’s suspension or 
expulsion for the following offenses;  however, for all offenses except 
171
-60- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
possession of a firearm on school property, in a school veh icle, or at a 
school-related activity, the decision maker must first consider 7 factors to 
determine if suspension or expulsion is appropriate.  
OFFENSES 
1. Arson (MCL 380.1311(2)) 
If a student commits arson in a school building or on school 
grounds, then the student shall be permanently expelled, subject to 
possible reinstatement in accordance with the Revised  School Code, 
MCL 380.1311(6).  
Before suspending or expelling a student for arson, the 7 restorative 
justice factors discussed below must be considered. 
2. Criminal Sexual Conduct (MCL 380.1311(2)) 
If a student commits criminal sexual conduct in a school building or 
on school grounds in violation of MCL 380.1311(2) , then the student 
shall be permanently expelled, subject to possible reinstatement in 
accordance with the Revised School Code, MCL 380.1311(6).  
Before suspending or expelling a student for criminal sexual 
conduct, the 7 restorative justice factors discussed below must be 
considered. 
3. Possession of a Dangerous Weapon Other than a F irearm (MCL 
380.1311(2)) 
If a student possesses a dangerous weapon, other than a firearm, in a 
weapon free school zone, the student shall be permanently expelled, 
subject to possible reinstatement in accordance with the Revised 
School Code, MCL 380.1311(6).  
172
-61- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
Before suspending or expelling a student for possessing a dangerous 
weapon other than a firearm, the 7 restorative justice factors 
discussed below must be considered. 
In addition to consideration of the 7 restorative justice factors, 
expulsion is not mandatory if the student establishes in a clear and 
convincing manner at least 1 of the following: 
(a) The object or instrument possessed by the pupil was not 
possessed by the pupil for use as a weapon, or for direct or 
indirect delivery to another person for use as a weapon. 
(b) The weapon was not knowingly possessed by the pupil. 
(c) The pupil did not know or have reason to know that the 
object or instrument possessed by the pupil constituted a 
dangerous weapon. 
(d) The weapon was possessed by the pupil at the suggestion, 
request, or  direction of, or with the express permission of, 
school or police authorities. 
There is a rebuttable presumption that expulsion for possession of a 
dangerous weapon  is not justified if a student establishes 1 of the 
factors listed in (a) through (d) abov e and the student has no history 
of suspension or expulsion. 
A “dangerous weapon” includes a dagger, dirk stiletto, knife with a 
blade over 3 inches in length, pocket knife opened by a mechanical 
device, iron bar or brass knuckles. MCL 380.1313(4). 
A “we apon free school zone” means school property and vehicles 
used by a school to transport students to or from school property. 
MCL 750.237a(6)(e). 
173
-62- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
4. Possession of a Firearm (MCL 380.1311(2)) 
If a student possesses a dangerous weapon, other than a firearm, in a 
weapon free school zone, the student shall be permanently expelled, 
subject to possible reinstatement in accordance with the Revised 
School Code, MCL 380.1311(6).  
The 7 restorative justice factors discussed below should not be 
considered before suspending or expelling a student for possessing a 
firearm. However, expulsion is not mandatory if the student 
establishes in a clear and convincing manner at least 1 of the 
following: 
(a) The object or instrument possessed by the pupil was not 
possessed by the pupil for use as a weapon, or for direct or 
indirect delivery to another person for use as a weapon. 
(b) The weapon was not knowingly possessed by the pupil. 
(c) The pupil did no t know or have reason to know that the 
object or instrument possessed by the pupil constituted a 
dangerous weapon. 
(d) The weapon was possessed by the pupil at the suggestion, 
request, or direction of, or with the express permission of, 
school or police authorities. 
There is a rebuttable presumption that expulsion for possession of a 
firearm is not justified if a student establishes 1 of the factors listed in 
(a) through (d) above and the student has no history of suspension 
or expulsion. 
“Firearm” means “me ans “(A) any weapon (including a starter gun) 
which will or is designed to or may readily be converted to expel a 
projectile by the action of an explosive; (B) the frame or receiver of 
any such weapon; (C) any firearm muffler or firearm silencer; or (D) 
any destructive device.” See MCL 380.1311(12)(d), citing 18 USC 921.  
174
-63- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
A “weapon free school zone” means school property and vehicles 
used by a school to transport students to or from school property. 
MCL 750.237a(6)(e). 
5. Physical Assault Against a School Employee, Volunteer, or 
Contractor (MCL 380.1311a(1)) 
If a student enrolled in grade 6 or above commits a physical assault 
against a school employee, volunteer, or contractor on school 
property, in a school vehicle, or at a school -related activi ty and the 
physical assault is reported to the school board, superintendent or 
building principal, then the student shall be suspended or expelled 
for up to 180 days.  
Before suspending or expelling a student for physical assault against 
another student, the 7 restorative justice factors discussed below 
must be considered. 
Physical assault means intentionally causing or attempting to cause 
physical harm to another through force or violence.  MCL 
380.1311a(12)(b). 
6. Physical Assault Against Another Student (MCL 380.1310) 
If a student enrolled in grade 6 or above commits a physical assault 
against another student on school property, in a school vehicle, or at 
a school -related activity  and the physical assault is reported to the 
school board, superintendent or building pri ncipal, then the student 
shall be suspended or expelled for up to 180 days.  
Before suspending or expelling a student for physical assault against 
another student, the 7 restorative justice factors discus sed below 
must be considered. 
Physical assault means intentionally causing or attempting to cause 
physical harm to another through force or violence. 
175
-64- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
7. Bomb Threats or other Similar Threats  
If a student in grade 6 or above makes a bomb threat or similar 
threat directed at a school building, other school property , or a 
school-related event, then the student shall be suspended or expelled 
for a period of time as determined in the discretion of the school 
board or its designee. 
Before suspending or expelling a student for making a bomb or 
similar threat at a school building, school property, or a school -
related event, the 7 restorative justice factors discussed below must 
be considered. 
RESTORATIVE JUSTICE FACTORS 
Pursuant to MCL 380.1310d(1), b efore suspending or expelling a  student 
for offenses 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, or 7 above, the school board, superintendent, 
principal, or other decisionmaker will consider the following factors : 
1. The student’s age; 
2. The student’s disciplinary history; 
3. Whether the student has a disability; 
4. The seriousness of the violation or behavior committed by the 
student; 
5. Whether the violation or behavior committed by the student 
threatened the safety of any student or staff member; 
6. Whether restorative practices will be used to address the 
violation or behavior committed by the student; 
7. Whether a less intervention would properly address the 
violation or behavior committed by the student. 
“Restorative practices” means practices that em phasize repairing the 
harm to the victim and the school community caused by the student’s 
misconduct. 
Students who are expelled shall be referred to the appropriate county 
department of social services or community mental health  agency. The 
176
-65- 
CHAPTER 10 
VIOLATIONS OF THE CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT 
parent, legal guardian and/or student shall also be notifie d of the 
referral. 
Students who commit any of the above offenses shall be reported to 
appropriate state or local law enforcement officials, as required under 
state law. 
Each student subject to expulsion shall have his/her situation reviewed 
by the superi ntendent on a case -by-case basis, in accordance with the 
requirements established by state law. 
This policy is intended to place the district in compliance with applicable 
law, and the superintendent is hereby authorized to take whatever 
actions are necessary to ensure such compliance.  
177
-66- 
CHAPTER 11 
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES 
     _______________________________ 
 DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES 
Absent unusual circumstances, a student will not be suspended/removed 
unless the student is reasonably suspected of being involved in the 
disciplinary incident being investigated. Such a suspension or removal 
shall not constitute discipline, although the incident which caused the 
investigation to occur may ultimately result in discipline. 
DUE PROCESS RIGHTS 
All students subject to disciplinary act ion, including suspension or 
expulsion, shall be afforded due process rights. Students will receive oral 
or written notice of the charges against them and the opportunity to 
respond to those charges. 
A school administrator may temporarily suspend or remov e a student 
from school for the purposes of investigating an incident prior to 
imposing any discipline, where such temporary suspension/removal is 
deemed necessary to prevent disruption to the educational program, 
avoid possible interference or problems in  the investigation, defuse 
conflict situations, protect the health or safety of the student or other 
students, or any other compelling reason. 
SUSPENSION 
Length of Suspension 
Suspension begins with notification by the building administrator and 
continues until midnight of the last suspension day . During a 
178
-67- 
CHAPTER 11 
CHAPTER 11 
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES 
suspension, a student  may not participate in or attend school -sponsored 
activities, either on or off campus, nor be on school district property . 
Homework During Suspension 
A minimum of one day is allowed for each day absent from class during 
a suspension to make -up missed assignments a nd prepare for tests . Any 
absence will affect the student’s learning experience and may affect a 
student’s academic performance. 
Suspension Process 
If the student is considered for suspension, or placed on disciplinar y 
probation for, for any period of time, the building administrator will: 
1. Notify the student’s parents of the proposed disciplinary action 
and the reasons for it before the  student leaves the building, if 
possible; 
2. Provide the student’s parents (or student, if 18 or older) with 
notification of the charges and related evidence, the time and 
place of the conference, and the length of the recomme nded 
suspension; schedule a conference, if requested by the parents or 
student, to include the student, his/her parents and other 
persons as the building administrator deems appropriate for the 
purpose of trying to resolve the problem; 
3. Within 24 hours of the conference, p rovide the student and 
parents with written notification of the disciplinary decision. If 
the decision is to suspend, include the length and term s of the 
suspension and the right to appeal the decision (if applicable), in 
the written notice. 
When a suspension of more than 10 days is recommended, t he building 
administrator will provide the student's parents with written notification 
of the charges and related evidence, the time and place of the conference, 
and the length of the recommended suspension.  At the conference with 
the build ing administrator , the student will be allowed to give his/her 
179
-68- 
CHAPTER 11 
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES 
version of the facts and be informed of  evidence offered against him/her.  
At the conference, the student will also have the right to present 
witnesses and to be represented by an attorne y or other individual of 
his/her choice . These rights also apply at any  subsequence hearings for 
appeal purposes. 
If the student, the principal or the par ents are unable to meet within any 
time period specified within this Chapter, the hearing may be scheduled 
at a mutually agreed upon time. 
Within 24 hours  of the conference, the building administrator shall 
inform the student and his/her parents of the decision and his/her right 
to appeal, if applicable.  
APPEALS 
The parent of the involved student must initiate all disciplinary appeals, 
unless the student is 18 years old, in wh ich case the student may initiate 
an appeal. 
Appeal of Short-Term Suspensions (6 to 10 Days) 
A suspension of 6 to 10 days may be appealed by contacting the building 
administrator who made the decision to suspend within 24 hours after 
receiving notice of the decision to suspend. 
If the initial decision to suspend was made by an administrator other 
than the building principal, then the appeal will be heard by the building 
principal, who will review the prior decision, meet with the student and 
parents if t he principal determines it is necessary, and provide notice of 
his or her decision to the student’s parents within 2 school days after 
receiving notice of the appeal.  This will be the final decision on the 
matter. 
If the initial decision to suspend was ma de by the building principal, 
then the appeal will be heard by: 
180
-69- 
CHAPTER 11 
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES 
• At the elementary level (grades K -5) – the Assistant Superintendent 
of Elementary Instruction. 
• At the secondary level (grades 6 -12) – the Assistant/Deputy 
Superintendent. 
The applicable individual li sted above will review the prior decision, 
meet with the student and parents if it is determined to be necessary , 
and provide notice of his or her decision to the student’s parents within 3 
school days after receiving notice of the appeal. This will be the  final 
decision on the matter. 
Appeal of Long-Term Suspensions (More Than 10 Days) 
A suspension of more than 10 may be appealed by contacting the 
principal who made the decision to suspend within 24 hours after 
receiving notice of the decision to suspend. 
Step 1:  Review by Principal (if applicable) 
If the decision to suspend was made by  an administrator other than the 
building principal, then the appeal will be heard by the building 
principal, who will review the prior decision, meet with the student and 
parents if the principal determines it is necessary, and provide notice of 
his or her decision to the student’s parents within 2 school days after 
receiving notice of the appeal.  
If the initial decision to suspend was made by the building principal, the 
appeal will proceed immediately to Step 2. 
Step 2:  Review by Assistant Superintendent of Elementary  Instruction 
or Assistant/Deputy Superintendent  
If the initial decision to suspend was made by the building principal, 
then the appeal will be heard by: 
181
-70- 
CHAPTER 11 
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES 
• At the elementary level (grades K -5) – the Assistant Superintendent 
of Elementary Instruction. 
• At the secondary level (grades 6 -12) – the Assistant/Deputy 
Superintendent. 
The admi nistrator listed above will meet with the parties involved 
within three school days and r eview the case. Within  24 hours of that 
meeting, the Assistant Superintendent of Elementary Instruction or 
Assistant/Deputy Superintendent will send written notification to the 
student and his/her parents of his/her decision to affirm, reverse, or 
modify the building principal’s decision  to suspend.  The written 
notification will also explain the student ’s right to appeal the decision to 
Step 3. 
Step 3: 
A student’s parents may appeal the decision of the Assistant 
Superintendent of Elementary Instruction (for element ary-level students) 
or the Assistant/Deputy Superintendent (for secondary-level students) to 
the Superintendent. To do so, the parent must provide notice of the 
appeal within two school days to the Assistant Superintendent of 
Elementary Instruction (for elementary -level students) or the 
Assistant/Deputy Superintendent (for secondary-level students). 
If the Superintendent determines it necessary, he or she will schedule a 
meeting with the student, parents, and any other persons necessary to 
make a final decision on the matter.  The Superintendent will send 
written notification to the student and his/her parents of the decision to 
affirm, reverse, or modify the previous decision within three school days 
of the meeting (if applicable) or within three school days after receiving 
notice of the appeal from the student’s parents. The decision of the 
Superintendent is final. 
EXPULSION 
If a student is considered for expulsion, the building administrator will: 
182
-71- 
CHAPTER 11 
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES 
1. Notify the student’s parents that the student is suspended 
pending possible expulsion before the student leaves the 
building, if possible; 
2. Determine within three days of the incident at issue if expulsion 
is recommended and if so, forward the written recommendation 
to the superintendent; 
3. Provide the student’s parents (or student, if 18 or older) with 
written notification of – 
a. The charges and related evidence; 
b. The time and place of the expulsion hearing; 
c. An explanation of the expulsion hearing process; and 
4. If requested to do so by the student or student’s parents, h old a 
conference with the student, student’s parents, and other 
persons as the building administrator  deems appropriate , to 
discuss the charges, related evidence, proposed expulsion, 
hearing procedure, or related matters. 
 Within five school days of receiving the building administrator ’s 
recommendation, the Superintendent or his or her designee will conduct 
a hearing with the involved parties to review the matter. If the student, 
the superintendent, or the parents are unable to meet within the time 
period, the hearing may be scheduled at a mutually agreed upon time . A 
mutually agreed upon time may be substituted fo r any hearing or appeal 
timeline. 
Within three school days of the hearing, the superintendent or designee 
will send written notification to the student and his/her parents of the 
decision to affirm, reverse or modify the recommendation of the building 
administrator. 
APPEALS 
Parents of a minor student, or a student 18 years or older, may appeal 
the superintendent’s decision to expel to the Troy Board of Education  by 
providing written notice of the appeal w ithin two school days after 
receiving the written notice of expulsion . A hearing will be held before 
the Troy Board of Education at the next regularly scheduled board 
meeting. The Troy Board of Education will inform the student and 
183
-72- 
CHAPTER 11 
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES 
his/her parents of its decision in writing within 3 school d ays after  
completion of the hearing. 
If the Troy Board of Education expels a student, the student shall be 
referred to the school counselor for referral to an appropriate agency for 
further guidance and counseling or assistance in obtaining employment 
or continuing education.  
As outlined in Sections 1311 and 1311a of the Revised School Code, 
students expelled pursuant to those sections of the Revised School Code 
may petition for reinstatement in accordance with those statutory 
provisions. 
Hearing Procedures 
At hearings before the Superintendent and the Troy Board of Education , 
the student will be permitted to give his/her version of the facts and be 
informed of  evidence offered against him/her. At the hearing, the 
student will also have the right to pr esent witnesses and to be 
represented by an attorney or other individual of his/her choice. Cross -
examination will be permitted as due process considerations  may 
require. 
184
-73- 
CHAPTER 12 
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES 
     _______________________________ 
 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 
A grievance is a charge by a student that there has been a violation, 
misinterpretation or inequitable application of an established school 
policy or r egulation, or if the student feels he/she has been treated 
unfairly or been denied due process   in a non -disciplinary matter . The 
procedure dealing with appeals of disciplinary issues is outlined on page 
54. 
Informal Grievance Procedure 
The student is encouraged to discuss the concern informally with the 
staff member involved before a Student Appeal/Grievance Form is filed. 
The ombudsman (high school only)  can be of help in attempting to solve 
the grievance informally and will, if the stu dent desires, accompany 
him/her to a conference with the staff member . It is the student's 
responsibility to initiate contact with the ombudsman. 
It is hoped that the great majority of grievances will be res olved in this 
manner. If this informal approach is not successful or not applicable to 
the situation, the student may initiate the following formal grievance 
procedure. 
Formal Grievance Procedure 
The student must obtain a standard Student Grievance Form from school 
administration, fill out all the information requested in the form and 
submit it to the principal within two school days of the incident. 
185
-74- 
CHAPTER 12 
CHAPTER 12 
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES 
Within three school days of the date of the filing, the principal shall call a 
meeting of the student and  the staff member in order to resolve the 
matter as quickly as possible . The student may be accompanied by 
his/her parents and/or the ombudsman at this meeting . The principal 
shall communicate his /her decision in writing to the student, his/her 
parents and  the staff member on the Student Grievance Form within 
three school days of the meeting. 
The student may appeal an adverse decision of a formal grievance to the 
assistant superintendent of elementary instruction (in elementary school 
cases) or to the assistant superintendent of secondary instruction (in 
middle and high school cases) by filling out the Student Grievance Form 
and returning it to the principal within two school days of the principal’s 
response. The principal will advise the appropriate assist ant 
superintendent that a request for an appeal has been received. 
The assistant superintendent of elementary instruction or 
assistant/deputy superintendent of secondary instruction shall meet with 
the student, staff member, and principal within five school days  of the 
request in order to resolve the matter . The student may be accompanied 
by his/her parents and/or the ombudsman at this meeting.  
The assistant superintendent of elementary instruction or 
assistant/deputy superintendent of secondary instruction  shall 
communicate his/her decision to all  participants on the Student 
Grievance Form within three school days of the meeting.  
The student m ay appeal a decision by the assistant superintendent of 
elementary instruction to the assistant/deputy superintendent of 
secondary instruction  by filling out the Student Grievance Form and 
returning it to the principal within three school days of the decis ion by 
the assistant superintendent of elementary instruction. The principal will 
advise the assistant/deputy superintendent of secondary instruction  that 
a request for an appeal has been received. 
The assistant/deputy superintendent of secondary instruction  shall meet 
with the student, staff member, principal and the assistant 
superintendent of elementary instruction within five school days of the 
186
-75- 
CHAPTER 12 
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES 
request in an attempt to resolve the matter . The student may be 
accompanied by his/her parents and/or the ombudsman at this meeting . 
The assistant superintendent of secondary  shall communicate his/her 
decision to all parties involved. 
The decision of the assistant/deputy superintendent of secondary 
instruction shall be final and binding upon all parties. 
Additional Co mments Regarding the Appeal/Grievance 
Procedures 
Students may be removed from school in accordance with normal school 
procedures during an appeal when, in the opinion of the principal, the 
student’s presence in the school is considered dangerous or disrup tive. 
If the principal, assistant superintendent of elementary instruction or 
assistant/deputy superintendent of secondary instruction is  unavailable, 
his or her  designated representatives may act in their behalf during the 
grievance procedure. 
All records , reports and actions taken will be treated confidentially to 
protect the rights of all parties . No record of an appeal and/or grievance 
will be kept in the student's CA-60. 
Failure of any administrator to hold a meeting or to render a decision 
shall allow automatic appeal to the next level.  
At any point in the appeal and/or grievance procedure, time limits may 
be extended by a mutual agreement. 
187
-76- 
GLOSSARY 
     _______________________________ 
Behavioral Contract   A written agreement with a student, th e student's 
parents and the principal which specifically states the conditions that 
must be met in order to correct a behavioral problem.  
Closed Campus    One in which all students remain on the school site 
during the school day, unless authorized permission to leave is granted.  
Denial of Driving Privileges    The denial of permission to drive to 
school for a specified time. 
Detention   The placement of a student in a supervised area. 
Disciplinary Probation    A period of time in which a student is put o n 
probation due to past behavioral problems .  Disciplinary probation is an 
acceptable disciplinary procedure whereby a student may not participate 
in extracurricular activities, may not perform before any audience or 
represent the school district in any capacity. 
Expulsion   The temporary permanent exclusion of a student from 
school greater than 60 days (MCL 380.1310). 
In-School Suspension   The assignment of a student to a program 
designed to meet the student's particular needs . This assignment may be 
located at the student's home school or at another site. 
Ombudsman    An individual who assists students in asserting their 
rights as set forth in this handbook, not including disciplinary matters.  
Parent Notification   Contact with a parent by phone, letter or meeting. 
Referral to Social Service Agencies    A recommendation that the 
student seek help from a public or private social service agency. 
Referral to Courts  The filing of a charge of an alleged illegal action with 
the appropriate judicial body.  
188
-77- 
GLOSSARY 
GLOSSARY 
Removal from Class    The removal of a student from class when his/her 
conduct is seriously disruptive and informal resolution is impractical.  
Reprimand   A written notification of censure for unacceptable behavior, 
which may also involve the removal or restriction of school privileges. 
Restitution/Restoration   The payment for or the restoring of property or 
articles which have been damaged, lost or stolen. 
SNAP Suspension  A disciplinary suspension issued to a student by a 
teacher in accordance with state law.  
Statutory Offense   A student infraction which constitutes a violation of 
a state law (statute). 
Suspension   A designated time less than 60 days (MCL 380.1310) when 
a student is not permitted to attend classes, to remain on school grounds 
or to participate in or attend any extracurricular activities. 
Tardiness   The act of a student not being in his/her classroom or seat 
when class is scheduled to begin as defined by the classroom teacher.  
Work Assignment    An assigned task which must be comp leted by the 
student and may be substituted for detention on an equal time basis. 
Working Day A day on which the Troy School District's Administrative 
Offices are open to serve the public . A working day includes days when 
schools are not in session, such as spring break and summer vacation.  
189
-78- 
POLICY OF NON-DISCRIMINATION 
Policy of Non-Discrimination 
Students, Parents and Citizens of the Troy School District: 
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 provides that no person shall, on the 
basis of sex, be excluded from particip ation in, be denied the benefits of, or be 
subjected to discrimination under any educational program or activity receiving 
federal financial assistance except as may be permitted by law. 
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 provides that no other wise qualified 
handicapped individual shall, solely by reason of his or her handicap, be excluded 
from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination 
under any program or activity receiving federal financial assistance. 
It is the policy of the Troy School District not to discriminate on the basis of sex or 
handicap in admission or access to treatment or employment in its programs and 
activities. The Troy School District periodically reviews its educational and 
employment programs and activities to assure compliance with Title IX and Section 
504. 
The Troy School District has established a grievance procedure to provide for the 
prompt and equitable resolution of complaints by students, employees or members of 
the community alleging discrimination on the basis of sex or handicap . The grievance 
procedure is available through any school office or by contacting the Coordinator for 
Title IX and Section 504 matters listed below . In addition, a school district employee 
who is part of a bargaining unit may process a complaint through the grievance 
procedure established in the collective bargaining agreement. 
In accordance with federal regulations, the Troy School District has appointed Mr. 
Jordan Harris, Assistant Superintendent for Employee Services as the Title IX  
Coordinator and Ms. Jessica Carrier, Director of Special Education, as the Section 504 
Coordinator. Any questions, suggestions or complaints should be directed to: 
Mr. Jordan Harris 
Assistant Superintendent for Employee Services 
Title IX Coordinator 
Ms. Jessica Carrier 
Director of Special Education 
 Section 504 Coordinator 
Troy School District • 4400 Livernois Road • Troy, Michigan  48098 
248.823.4000   
4830-7166-2424, v. 4 
190
-79- 
                  5. F.  10.1618 
5.  CONSENT 
 F. CONSIDERATION:      PAC Representative for Oakland Schools 
Oakland Schools requires that each local school district take action to 
approve a special education Parent Advisory Committee (PAC) 
representative. The Oakland Schools Parent Advisory Committee 
(PAC) represents each local education agency or public  school academy 
(LEA/PSA) within Oakland County. Parent representatives have a 
child/children with a disability(ies) and are appointed by the LEA's/PSA' s and 
Oakland County School Boards.  The committee participates in the 
development and review of the Oakland Schools County Plan for Delivery of 
Special Education Programs and Services. The PAC also provides advisory 
input on matters regarding improvement of Special Education services within 
the intermediate school district (ISD).    Janet Grieme, Troy High School 
Parent and Toina Wilson , Hill/Larson Parent,  will serve as Troy’s parent 
representative for the Oakland Schools PAC for the 2018/19 School Year.  
RECOMMENDED ACTION:  Adopt the following resolution. 
   Moved by  
   Supported by  
Be It Therefore Resolved  that the Troy Board of Education takes action to 
approve the special education Parent Advisory Committee (PAC) representative as 
stated above.   
Yes:  
No:  
191
         7. A.    10.16.18 
7.  CURRICULUM            
A.  3rd Grade Reading and Gap Analysis 
Deputy Superintendent Mark Dziatczak and Kris Griffor, Assistant 
Superintendent, Elementary Instruction, will provide a report on the 
3rd Grade Reading and Gap Analysis that was shared at the October 
2nd Board Workshop.   
Recommended Action:  This is a report. 
192
Gap Analysis & Third 
Grade Reading
October 2, 2018
Board of Education Workshop
Department of Teaching & Learning
Kris Griffor
Mark Dziatczak
193
OneTroy Mission Statement
The purpose of the Troy School District is to 
ensure learning for all members of the school 
community.
2
194
OneTroy Core Values
ALL!
3
195
Vision: World Class by 2020
”It is an “old notion” that struggling students must wait until they 
have mastered foundational skills before engaging in authentic 
and engaging tasks.”  - Fullan, Quinn, McEachen 2018
4
196
Troy School District
Michigan Statewide Testing Program
2017-18 Selected Results
5
197
81
75 73 73 73
70 69 68
27
38
35
48
43
48
45
58 58 56 55
50 51 51
55
25 26 25
36
33
36
33
48 47 46 44
37 37 38
44
18 19 19
26 27 27
24
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
14‐15 15‐16 16‐17 17‐18 14‐15 15‐16 16‐17 17‐18 14‐15 15‐16 16‐17 17‐18 14‐ 15 15‐16 16‐17 17‐18
ELA 3‐8 Combined Math 3‐8 Combined Science 4 & 7 Combined Social S tudies 5 & 8 Combined
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
2014-15 to 2017-18 M-STEP Results Grades 3 - 8 Combined
Troy Oakland 28 LEAs Michigan
6
198
73 73
77
73 73
68
73
69
66 67
70
66
43
47
55 56
59
52
54 54
57
54
49 48 49
46
26
40
44 45 47
41 43 43
46
42
34 35 36
33
18
29
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 4th 7th 5th 8th
English Language Arts Mathem atics Science Social Studies
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
Subject Area and Grade
2017-18 M-STEP Results
Troy Oakland 28 LEAs Michigan
7
199
82 87 84 80 84 85 83 80 79
72 77 75
64 68 72 70 68
70 69 70 69 70 69 67 68
65
54 52
56
47 47
49 47 48
61 61 61 61 63 61 60 59 58
41 42 43
36 38 38 37 36
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
15‐16 16‐17 17‐18 15‐16 16‐17 17‐18 15‐16 16‐17 17‐18 2015‐
16
2016‐
17
17‐18 2015‐
16
2016‐
17
17‐18 15‐16 16‐17
PSAT ELA ‐ 9 PSAT ELA ‐ 10 SAT ELA 11 PSAT Math 9 PSAT Math 10 SAT M ath 11
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
Subject Area, Grade Level, Year of Test
2015-16 to 2017-18 PSAT & SAT Results
Troy Oakland 28 LEAs Michigan
8
200
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Pontiac
Hazel Park
Southfield
Madison
Clarenceville
Ferndale
Lamphere
Waterford
Brandon
Michigan
West Bloomfield
Clawson
Holly
Huron Valley
Avondale
Farmington
Oakland 28 LEAs
Walled Lake
Royal Oak
Oxford
Clarkston
Berkley
South Lyon
Bloomfield Hills
Novi
Lake Orion
Birmingham
Rochester
Troy
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
Oakland 28 LEAs Ranked on 2017-18 M-STEP Percent Met
English Language Arts  3rd‐8th Combined 14‐15   15‐16   16‐17   17‐18
9
201
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Hazel Park
Pontiac
Southfield
Ferndale
Madison
Clarenceville
Lamphere
Waterford
Michigan
Clawson
Holly
Avondale
Brandon
West Bloomfield
Farmington
Royal Oak
Huron Valley
Oakland 28 LEAs
Oxford
South Lyon
Clarkston
Walled Lake
Berkley
Lake Orion
Birmingham
Bloomfield Hills
Troy
Rochester
Novi
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
Oakland 28 LEAs Ranked on 2017-18 M-STEP Percent Met
Mathematics 3rd‐8th Combined 14‐15   15‐16   16‐17   17‐18
10
202
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Pontiac
Hazel Park
Ferndale
Madison
Southfield
Waterford
Clawson
Lamphere
Avondale
Brandon
Michigan
Clarenceville
Holly
Oakland 28 LEAs
Farmington
West Bloomfield
Huron Valley
Walled Lake
Berkley
Royal Oak
South Lyon
Clarkston
Oxford
Lake Orion
Rochester
Troy
Bloomfield Hills
Novi
Birmingham
Percent Career or College Ready
Oakland 28 LEAs Ranked on 2017-18 PSAT/SAT Career or College Ready
PSAT ELA* 9 15‐16   16‐17   17‐18 * Evidence Based Reading & Writing
11
203
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Pontiac
Hazel Park
Ferndale
Southfield
Madison
Waterford
Clawson
Lamphere
Avondale
Brandon
Michigan
Clarenceville
Holly
Huron Valley
Oakland 28 LEAs
Lake Orion
Walled Lake
Farmington
Clarkston
Oxford
Royal Oak
West Bloomfield
Rochester
Berkley
South Lyon
Bloomfield Hills
Novi
Troy
Birmingham
Percent Career or College Ready)
Oakland 28 LEAs Ranked on 2017-18 PSAT/SAT Career or College Ready
PSAT ELA* 10 15‐16   16‐17   17‐18 * Evidence Based Reading & Writing
12
204
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Pontiac
Madison
Ferndale
Hazel Park
Southfield
Waterford
Brandon
Clarenceville
Lamphere
Avondale
Michigan
Holly
Oxford
Clawson
Huron Valley
Oakland 28 LEAs
Walled Lake
Clarkston
Farmington
West Bloomfield
Royal Oak
South Lyon
Lake Orion
Bloomfield Hills
Troy
Berkley
Rochester
Birmingham
Novi
Percent Career or College Ready)
Oakland 28 LEAs Ranked on 2017-18 PSAT/SAT Career or College Ready
SAT ELA* 11 15‐16   16‐17   17‐18 * Evidence Based Reading & Writing
13
205
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Hazel Park
Pontiac
Madison
Ferndale
Lamphere
Southfield
Waterford
Clawson
Holly
Avondale
Michigan
Clarenceville
Brandon
Oxford
Huron Valley
Berkley
Farmington
Oakland 28 LEAs
West Bloomfield
Walled Lake
Royal Oak
South Lyon
Clarkston
Lake Orion
Bloomfield Hills
Rochester
Troy
Birmingham
Novi
Percent Career or College Ready)
Oakland 28 LEAs Ranked on 2017-18 PSAT/SAT Career or College Ready
PSAT Math 9 15‐16   16‐17   17‐18
14
206
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Pontiac
Hazel Park
Ferndale
Madison
Southfield
Waterford
Clawson
Lamphere
Clarenceville
Avondale
Michigan
Holly
Huron Valley
Brandon
Oxford
Oakland 28 LEAs
Walled Lake
Farmington
Lake Orion
Royal Oak
Clarkston
Berkley
West Bloomfield
Bloomfield Hills
South Lyon
Birmingham
Rochester
Troy
Novi
Percent Career or College Ready)
Oakland 28 LEAs Ranked on 2017-18 PSAT/SAT Career or College Ready
PSAT Math 10 15‐16   16‐17   17‐18
15
207
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Pontiac
Madison
Hazel Park
Ferndale
Southfield
Waterford
Clarenceville
Lamphere
Brandon
Holly
Michigan
Avondale
Clawson
Huron Valley
Oxford
Farmington
Oakland 28 LEAs
Clarkston
Walled Lake
West Bloomfield
Berkley
Lake Orion
Royal Oak
Bloomfield Hills
South Lyon
Birmingham
Rochester
Troy
Novi
Percent Career or College Ready)
Oakland 28 LEAs Ranked on 2017-18 PSAT/SAT Career or College Ready
SAT Math 11 15‐16   16‐17   17‐18
16
208
Relevant Results Relationships
Percent Economically Disadvantaged
Michigan Statewide Testing Program
2017-18 Results
17
209
14 14 16
30 32
36 36
41 41
44
48 49 50 51 53 55 55 55 55 56 56
59 61
68 68 69 69 70
73
9 11 11
17
25 27
22
31 31
41
46
38 38
48
40
47
50
56
48
51 53
58
52
65
76
60
64
70 69
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Pontiac
Hazel Park
Southfield
Madison
Clarenceville
Ferndale
Lamphere
Waterford
Brandon
West Bloomfield
Clawson
Holly
Huron Valley
Avondale
Farmington
Oakland 28 LEAs
Walled Lake
Royal Oak
Oxford
Clarkston
Berkley
South Lyon
Bloomfield Hills
Novi
Lake Orion
Birmingham
Rochester
Troy
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
2018 M-STEP Grade 3-8 Combined - Relationships of Interest
M‐STEP ELA 3‐8 % Met M‐STEP Math 3‐8 % Met
18
210
86
91
79
67
84
66 64
56
61
42
37
44
48
28
45
28
32
28 26 26
22 22 19
11 9
23
9
13
1514 14 16
30 32
36 36
41 41
44
48 49 50 51 53 55 55 55 55 56 56
59 61
68 68 69 69 70
73
9 11 11
17
25 27
22
31 31
41
46
38 38
48
40
47
50
56
48
51 53
58
52
65
76
60
64
70 69
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Pontiac
Hazel Park
Southfield
Madison
Clarenceville
Ferndale
Lamphere
Waterford
Brandon
West Bloomfield
Clawson
Holly
Huron Valley
Avondale
Farmington
Oakland 28 LEAs
Walled Lake
Royal Oak
Oxford
Clarkston
Berkley
South Lyon
Bloomfield Hills
Novi
Lake Orion
Birmingham
Rochester
Troy
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
2018 M-STEP - Relationships of Interest
% Economically Disadvantaged Grade 3‐8 M‐STEP ELA 3‐8 % Met M‐STEP Math 3‐8 % Met
19
211
90 91
79 81
72 72
58 59
47
40
64
32 30
33
49
26
40
27
19
45
29 31
11
18
25
13
7 7
1613
16 17
25
31
37 39 39 41
46 47 48 49 49
52 53 54 55 56 56 57 58
67 68 69 69 70
72 73
14 16 17
33
35 33
26
42
38
48
42
54
59
51
53
66
61 60
56
52 53 54
67
72
68
74
82
71
73
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pontiac
Oak Park
Hazel Park
Madison
Clarenceville
Southfield
Ferndale
Lamphere
Brandon
Clawson
Waterford
Walled Lake
Oxford
Oakland 28 LEAs
Holly
Clarkston
West Bloomfield
Farmington
South Lyon
Avondale
Royal Oak
Huron Valley
Bloomfield Hills
Berkley
Lake Orion
Rochester
Novi
Birmingham
Troy
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
2018 M-STEP - Relationships of Interest
% Econ Disadv Grade 3 English Language Arts Grade 3 Math Grade 3
20
212
89 89
77
70
64
66
59
89
63
46
49
32
26
49
21
32
39
23
29
19
9
49
27
10
24
9
25
12
1512
24 26 28
31 32
40 40
43 44 45
50 52 53 54 54 55 57 57 58 60 61 62
64
68 69 70 72 73
12
19
8
23
15
30
35
43
39
48
43
47
56
41
53
50
58
54
65
62
76
52 53
68
58
61 61
77
69
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pontiac
Oak Park
Hazel Park
Ferndale
Southfield
Clarenceville
Lamphere
Madison
Waterford
Brandon
Clawson
Oakland 28 LEAs
Oxford
Avondale
South Lyon
Huron Valley
West Bloomfield
Clarkston
Walled Lake
Berkley
Novi
Holly
Farmington
Bloomfield Hills
Royal Oak
Birmingham
Lake Orion
Rochester
Troy
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
2018 M-STEP - Relationships of Interest
% Econ Disadv Grade 4 English Language Arts Grade 4 Math Grade 4
21
213
89
82
90
64
85
68
45
68
61 60
48
32
37
23
30
48
29 28 27
22
26
40
13 12
21
8
20
9
1714
18 18
25
32
34
45 46 47 49
51 52 53 54 54 54 56
59 60 60
66 67 69 70 72 72
75 76 77
7 6
12
16 17
11
40
20
32
37
34
40
50 51
46
31
46
60
41
44
52
41
58
70
65
75
57
65 66
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Hazel Park
Pontiac
Ferndale
Madison
Southfield
Brandon
Clarenceville
Waterford
Lamphere
Holly
Oakland 28 LEAs
West Bloomfield
Oxford
Royal Oak
Avondale
Huron Valley
Walled Lake
Farmington
South Lyon
Clarkston
Clawson
Bloomfield Hills
Rochester
Berkley
Novi
Lake Orion
Birmingham
Troy
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
2018 M‐STEP ‐ Relationships of Interest
% Econ Disadv Grade 5 English Language Arts Grade 5 Math Grade 5
22
214
86
78
91
70
65
54
92
62
67
38
50
48
30 29
32
42
46
26 25 24
28
22
24
12
19
9
11 9
1512
14 16
25
31
34 35 36 36 36
39 42 42 45 46 47
50 50 52 52 54
58
62 64 66 67
69 69
73
9
14
10 10
28
31
11
28
22
33
28 26
48
37
40 38
45
50
48
50
45
58 56
64
57
67 68
77
67
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Hazel Park
Pontiac
Southfield
Clarenceville
Lamphere
Madison
Waterford
Ferndale
West Bloomfield
Clawson
Holly
Huron Valley
Farmington
Oakland 28 LEAs
Brandon
Avondale
Walled Lake
Royal Oak
Berkley
Oxford
Clarkston
Lake Orion
Birmingham
South Lyon
Bloomfield Hills
Rochester
Novi
Troy
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
2018 M-STEP - Relationships of Interest
% Econ Disadv Grade 6 English Language Arts Grade 6 Math Grade 6
23
215
83
79
93
80
63 63
60 59
34
57
43
29
39
31
28 30
48
41
25 27
20
7
17
25
12
23
14
10
15
10
13 13
31 32 33
37 39
41 42 43 43 45
48 50 51 52 54 55 56 57
65 66 66 67 69 70 70
73
4
9 8
24
15
26
23
31
42
28
35
39
42 40
52
44
37 38
56 55
45
60
55 57
65
58
65
76
70
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Hazel Park
Pontiac
Madison
Southfield
Clarenceville
Lamphere
Waterford
West Bloomfield
Ferndale
Clawson
Royal Oak
Brandon
Oakland 28 LEAs
Huron Valley
Farmington
Holly
Avondale
Berkley
Walled Lake
Clarkston
Birmingham
South Lyon
Oxford
Bloomfield Hills
Lake Orion
Rochester
Novi
Troy
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
2018 M-STEP - Relationships of Interest
% Econ Disadv Grade 7 English Language Arts Grade 7 Math Grade 7
24
216
78 76
91
64
81
59
36
50
61
69
19
46
30
21 23
42
36
42
26 25
18
26
19
10 10
14 14
21
117 10
15
26
30
36
39 41 41 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 50
52
57 57 58 59
62
65
68 68 69
71 71
1
9 7
20 19 21
41
29
22
20
44
18
37
40
46
31
38
34
46
39
42
53
49
73
64 66 67
63
68
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Hazel Park
Pontiac
Southfield
Madison
Waterford
Brandon
Holly
Clarenceville
Ferndale
Clarkston
Lamphere
Oakland 28 LEAs
Huron Valley
Berkley
Avondale
West Bloomfield
Clawson
Farmington
Oxford
Royal Oak
Walled Lake
South Lyon
Novi
Birmingham
Troy
Rochester
Lake Orion
Bloomfield Hills
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
2018 M-STEP - Relationships of Interest
% Econ Disadv Grade 8 English Language Arts Grade 8 Math Grade 8
25
217
17
23
32
36 37
42
47
55 56 57 57
60
65
68 69 70 71 72 72 73
75 75
78 79
82 82 82
85
4
8
12
17 16
21
24
31
41 40
34 34
38
51
46
53 51
48
55 54
57 56
63
55
71
63
73
77
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Oak Park
Pontiac
Hazel Park
Ferndale
Madison
Southfield
Waterford
Lamphere
Brandon
Avondale
Clawson
Clarenceville
Holly
Oakland 28 LEAs
Huron Valley
Walled Lake
Farmington
Oxford
Clarkston
West Bloomfield
Lake Orion
Royal Oak
South Lyon
Berkley
Rochester
Bloomfield Hills
Troy
Novi
Percent Career or College Ready
2018 PSAT 9 & 10 & SAT 11 Combined - Relationships of Interest
PSAT & SAT ELA PSAT & SAT Math
26
218
89 89
75
71
81
60
56
45
38
42 42
57
36
31
25 25 26 27
18
31
22
26
16
21
12 13
16
9
17
23
32
36 37
42
47
55 56 57 57
60
65
68 69 70 71 72 72 73
75 75 78 79
82 82 82
85
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Pontiac
Hazel Park
Ferndale
Madison
Southfield
Waterford
Lamphere
Brandon
Avondale
Clawson
Clarenceville
Holly
Oakland 28 LEAs
Huron Valley
Walled Lake
Farmington
Oxford
Clarkston
West Bloomfield
Lake Orion
Royal Oak
South Lyon
Berkley
Rochester
Bloomfield Hills
Troy
Novi
Percent Career or College Ready
2018 PSAT 9 & 10 & SAT 11 Combined - Relationships of Interest
% Economically Disadvantaged PSAT & SAT ELA
27
219
89 88
75
81
71
60
56
45 43
57
36
42
38
25
27 26
31
25
31
21
18
26
22
13
16
12
10
16
4
8
12
16 17
21
24
31
34 34
38 40 41
46 48
51 51 53 54 55 55 56 57
63 63
71 72 73
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Oak Park
Pontiac
Hazel Park
Madison
Ferndale
Southfield
Waterford
Lamphere
Clawson
Clarenceville
Holly
Avondale
Brandon
Huron Valley
Oxford
Farmington
Oakland 28 LEAs
Walled Lake
West Bloomfield
Berkley
Clarkston
Royal Oak
Lake Orion
Bloomfield Hills
South Lyon
Rochester
Birmingham
Troy
Percent Career or College Ready
2018 PSAT 9 & 10 & SAT 11 Combined - Relationships of Interest
% Economically Disadvantaged PSAT & SAT Math
28
220
Troy School District
M-Step Proficiency
for Selected Student Groups
2017-18 Results
29
221
73
76
69
77
47
77
29
77
53
74
48
73
55
66
85
78
68
55
60
50
66
31
59
19
57
33
60
28
56
41
53
76
45
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
All ‐ 5711
Female ‐ 2800
Male ‐ 2911
Not ED ‐ 4836
ED ‐ 875
w/o IEP ‐ 5189
with IEP ‐ 522
Not ELL ‐ 4724
ELL ‐ 987
Other ‐ 4038
Afr Amer ‐ 250
Other ‐ 4058
Hispanic ‐ 179
Other ‐ 2379
Asian ‐ 2099
Other ‐ 2133
White ‐ 2980
All Gender Econ Disadv Spec Ed Eng Lang Learner African American Hisp anic Asian White
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
Student Group ‐ Number of Students
M-STEP Spring 2018 Results for Student Groups
Troy English Language Arts 3‐8 Oakland 28 LEAs English Language Arts 3‐8
30
222
68
66
71
74
37
73
26
71
57
70
32
69
46
58
86
77
61
50 49
52
62
24
54
17
51
40
56
18
51
34
47
81
41
55
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
All ‐ 5778
Female ‐ 2835
Male ‐ 2943
Not ED ‐ 4894
ED ‐ 884
w/o IEP ‐ 5255
with IEP ‐ 523
Not ELL ‐ 4721
ELL ‐ 1057
Other ‐ 3876
Afr Amer ‐ 249
Other ‐ 3868
Hispanic ‐ 190
Other ‐ 2100
Asian ‐ 2152
Other ‐ 2149
White ‐ 2984
All Gender Econ Disadv Spec Ed Eng Lang Learner African American Hisp anic Asian White
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
Student Group ‐ Number of Students
M-STEP Spring 2018 Results for Student Groups
Troy Mathematics 3‐8 Oakland 28 LEAs Mathematics 3‐8
31
223
45
42
49 50
22
48
17
50
13
46
24
46
38 39
56
51
40
33 31
36
42
14
36
10
35
8
38
11
34
21
32
48
25
38
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
All ‐ 1968
Female ‐ 948
Male ‐ 1020
Not ED ‐ 1657
ED ‐ 311
w/o IEP ‐ 1811
with IEP ‐ 157
Not ELL ‐ 1723
ELL ‐ 245
Other ‐ 872
Afr Amer ‐ 84
Other ‐ 865
Hispanic ‐ 72
Other ‐ 488
Asian ‐ 724
Other ‐ 483
White ‐ 1019
All Gender Econ Disadv Spec Ed Eng Lang Learner African American Hisp anic Asian White
Percent Met (Proficient or Advanced)
Student Group ‐ Number of Students
M-STEP Spring 2018 Results for Student Groups
Troy Social Studies 5 & 8 Oakland 28 LEAs Social Studies 5 & 8
32
224
Attacking the Gaps – Deep Learning for ALL
Elementary
• CAT Work
• PreK
• Targeted Supplemental 
Support
• LLI
• Reading Recovery
• Math Recovery
• Parent Support
• Scheduling Support
• Peer Coaching
• Tutoring - Enrichment
• Transition Programming
• Summer Success Academy
Secondary
• CAT Work
• NHS Homework Help
• Course Changes (eg. Biology, 
English, LS) (Low and Slow)
• AP Potential
• Scheduling & Approvals
• Math Connections
• Team Teaching
• Peer Coaching
• Tutoring – Enrichment
• Transition Programming
• Summer Success Academy
33
225
Elementary Literacy Multi-Tiered 
System of Support
Ensuring Learning for ALL
34
226
35
227
36
228
Number of Students on Individual 
Reading Plans – Fall 2017
37
229
Bradlee
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
September February May
GLE Student
38
230
Caleb
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
September February May
GLE Student
39
231
Leonie
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
September February May
GLE Student
40
232
Number of Students of Individual Reading 
Improvement Plans – Spring 2018
41
233
Discussion
42
234
         8. A. 10.16.18 
8. BUSINESS 
 A. REPORT: 2017-2018 AUDIT REPORT 
David Youngstrom, Audit Partner from Yeo & Yeo , will make a 
presentation to the Board of Education.  A draft copy of the 
District’s Audit Report was presented to the Board at the October 
2, 2018 workshop. 
RECOMMENDED ACTION:  This is a report. 
235
PRESENTED BYPRESENTED BY
David R. Youngstrom, CPADavid R. Youngstrom, CPA
Troy School DistrictTroy School District
June 30, 2018June 30, 2018
236
Audit Results
Financial Statements:
•Unmodified Opinion
–Highest level of assurance
–School's financial records and statements are fairly and appropriately 
presented, and in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted 
in the United States of America; this includes the design, implementation, 
and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation and fair 
presentation of financial statements that are free from material 
misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. 
1 237
Balance Sheet-Governmental Funds
2 238
Statement of Revenues, Expenditures and Changes in 
Fund Balances
3 239
General Fund Revenue (includes Other Sources)
Year Ended June 30, 2018
Federal
$ 3,333,254
Local
2%
$ 38,844,065
26%
State
$ 101,977,419
67%
Interdistrict sources
$ 7,537,593
5%
[CATEGORY NAME]
[VALUE]
Less than 1%
4 240
General Fund Expenditures
Year Ended June 30, 2018
Employee Benefits
$48,780,644
32%
Purchased Services
$19,695,836
13%
Supplies and Materials
$6,053,649
4%
[CATEGORY NAME]
[VALUE]
49%
Less than 1%Other
$1,980,625
1%
Salaries
$73,741,957
5 241
General Fund Expenditures
Year Ended June 30, 2018
Supporting Services
$46,452,918
31%
Instruction
$104,214,738
69%
[CATEGORY NAME]
[VALUE]
Less than 1%
Note: Instruction consists of the following  - basic programs (elementary, middle/junior high, high school, pre-kindergarten, 
summer school), added needs (special education, compensatory education, career and technical education, and adult/continuing 
education (basic and secondary). Supporting services consists of the following - pupil, instructional staff, general administration, 
5
school administration, business, operations and maintenance, pupil transportation services, central, and athletic activities.242
Instructional Expenditures Comparison
100.00%
68% 69% 69% 69%
90.00%
64%
80.00%
70.00%
60.00%
50.00%
40.00%
30.00%
20.00%
10.00%
0.00%
2016-17
Troy Schools
2014-15
Troy Schools
2015-16
Troy Schools
Troy Schools
2017-18
Average of All Oakland 
County Schools
2016-17
8 243
Per-Pupil Analysis of General Fund
Revenues and Expenditures
$ 12,000
$ 11,596
$ 11,353
$ 11,500
$ 11,516
$ 11,094
$ 11,145
$ 10,924
$ 11,000
$ 11,028
$ 10,812
$ 10,500
$ 10,560 $ 10,526
$ 10,000
$ 9,500
$ 9,000
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Revenues Expenses
$ 10,641 $ 10,585
9 244
Ten Year Enrollment Trend Analysis
14,000
13,089
12,881
13,000
12,717
12,438
12,312
12,000
11,000
10,000
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Enrollment
12,177 12,076 12,032
12,591 12,563
10 245
General Fund Unassigned Balance (with percentage of 
expenditures)
$ 30,000,000
[VALUE]
16.44%
[VALUE]
16.52%
$ 25,000,000
$ 20,000,000
$ 15,000,000
$ 10,000,000
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
15.76%
14.74%
[VALUE]
15.00%
[VALUE]
[VALUE]
11 246
Internal Controls and Compliance
Financial Statements:
•No Material Weaknesses Identified
•No Significant Deficiencies Identified
•No Material Noncompliance
Federal Awards:
•Major Program –  
•Child Nutrition Cluster – Unmodified Opinion
•Special Education Cluster – Unmodified Opinion
•No Material Weaknesses Identified
•No Significant Deficiencies Identified
•No Material Noncompliance
12 247
Governance Letter
Required communication
Management Comments
•Prior Year – 
•Federal Procedures - See below, in progress
•Time and Effort Record Keeping - Corrected
•Current Year – 
•Federal Procedures
•Athletic Receipt Procedures
13 248
Future Challenges
•State economic/political condition
•Rising fringe benefit costs
•Retirement rate increase
•Post employment benefit obligation - 
nearly $77M
•Net pension liability - over $225.2M
14 249
CONNECT with Us:
yeoandyeo.com
Thank you!
David R. Youngstrom, CPA
davyou@yeoandyeo.com
250
         8. B. 10.16.18 
8. BUSINESS 
  B.     CONSIDERATION: 2017-2018 AUDIT REPORT 
Administration recommends that the Board of Education accept 
the financial statements as presented by David Youngstrom, Audit 
Partner from Yeo & Yeo.   
RECOMMENDED ACTION:  Acceptance of the resolution below. 
SUGGESTED RESOLUTION 
Moved By: ____________________________ 
Supported By: _______________________ 
Be it therefore resolved that the Board of Education accept and approve the 
Troy School District’s audited 2018 financial statements as presented by Yeo & 
Yeo. 
Yes:  _______________ 
No:  ______________ 
251
 8.C.    10.16.18 
8. BUSINESS 
C.  CONSIDERATION:  Early Childhood Center Bid Pack 2 
A RFP was issued to obtain competitive bids for  joint sealants, roller shades and 
access/security controls for the  Early Childhood Center.  Bid responses were 
reviewed by Rob Carson, Director of Operations and the bond team of TMP 
Associates, Peter Basso & Associates and Barton Malow , and it is recommended 
the bid be awarded as stated below.  
 RECOMMENDED ACTION:  Accept the resolution below. 
SUGGESTED RESOLUTION 
 Moved by:   
 Supported by: 
 Be it therefore resolved  that bid 9862 be awarded as follows in the amount of 
$145,366.00 and that this amount be approved as an expenditure of the of the Early 
Childhood Center Fund. 
D.C. Byers Joint Sealants $ 28,978.00 
The Sheer Shop Roller Shades   30,163.00 
MCMI Access/Security Controls   86,225.00 
Total   $145,366.00 
 Yes: 
 No: 
252
         Barton Malow Company
                                                                                          26500 American Drive – Southfield, Michigan  48034 – p 248.4365000 – f 248.436.5001 
September 25, 2018
Mr. Rick West, Assistant of Business Services
Troy School District
1140 Rankin
Troy, MI  48083
Re: Bid Package 2:  Troy Schools Early Childhood Center
Contract Award Recommendations
Dear Mr. West:
Bid proposals were received for four bid categories on September 18, 2018 for Bid Package 2:  
Troy Schools Early Childhood Center.  The rebid categories for the bid package include roller 
shades, joint sealants, casework and access control.  Due to low bidder turnout for the casework 
category the casework bids were not opened.  The casework bid category will be rebid in 
October 2018.   
The proposals and qualifications of the apparent low bidders listed below have been reviewed 
during post-bid interviews over the course of the past week.  A bid tabulation for the bids 
received is attached.
Work Scope Category Contractor Name Amount
07000 Joint Sealants D.C.Byers $ 28,978.00
12200 Roller Shades The Sheer Shop $ 30,163.00
TOTAL AWARD $145,366.00
The categories contained in the award recommendation are within the construction budget 
currently set for the Troy Schools Early Childhood Center.
Please contact me should you have any questions.
Sincerely,
Christa Amalio
BMC Project Manager
Attachment:  Bid Tabulation 
cc:  Mr. Robert Carson – TSD
       Mrs. Michelle Kerns
253
23000 Access Control Mechanical Controls & Maintenance Inc. (MCMI)$ 86,225.00
BP#2: Troy School District Early Childhood Center BP#2
Prepared by Barton Malow Company 
Project Location: 205 Square Lake Road, Troy, MI 48083
Proposal Summary Awarded / Apparent Low
Generated September 18th 2018 Awarded bids are highlighted
Submitted Total $145,366
BID PACKAGES Company Total Cost
Access Control MCMI $86,225
Casework category was not opened due to lack of bids
Joint Sealants D.C. Byers Company, Inc. $28,978
Roller Shades The Sheer Shop (1st and 2nd low bidders were disqualified) $30,163
Subtotal $145,366
254
BP#2: Troy School District Early Childhood Center BP#2
Prepared by Barton Malow Company
Access Control MCMI
Generated September 18th 2018 Submitted by Mary Kay Savalle
Submitted Total $86,225
Original Proposal, September 17th 2018
LINE ITEMS Unit Qty Unit Cost Total Cost
Base Bid (Including Bond) $86,225
Subtotal $86,225
SCOPE-SPECIFIC INFORMATION
How much did you include in your base bid for 
alllowance? (see work scopes) $0
Voluntary Alternate No. 1
Voluntary Alternate No. 2
Voluntary Alternate No. 3
If awarded multiple bid categories, deduct this 
amount as a combined bid discount
255
BP#2: Troy School District Early Childhood Center BP#2
Prepared by Barton Malow Company
Casework
Generated September 18th 20
Submitted Total
LINE ITEMS Casework bids were not opened due to lack of bidders.
Base Bid (Including Bond)
ALTERNATES
Alternate No. 3: Quote add/deduct price to: Provide TMI 
Systems Corporation prefabricated casework product 
number W9031, W9032, and/or W9033 – 48” high x 13” 
deep with 12” wide (nom) cubbies, (modified to include 
sloped tops) in lieu of millwork as indicated in 
specifications and drawings.  416 cubbies total, located 
outside of classrooms.  Laminate to be selected by 
architect from manufacturer’s full line.
Alternate No. 4: To provide four (4) Casework units 
B1120-33-3-14 in each of 26 classrooms as shown on 
enlarged classroom plan 1/A1.1A1 on Drawing A6.1 and 
on enlarged classroom plans 1/A1.1A, 2/A1.1A, and 
3/A1.1A on Drawing A6.2
Subtotal
SCOPE-SPECIFIC INFORMATION
How much did you include in your base bid 
alllowance? (see work scopes)
Voluntary Alternate No. 1
Voluntary Alternate No. 2
Voluntary Alternate No. 3
GENERAL ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Bidder, in compliance with the Advertisement to Bid for 
construction contemplated for this Bid Package having 
the proposed Project and the conditions affecting the 
proposed work in the Bid Category(ies) proposes to 
furnish all labor,  materials, tools, equipment, machinery, 
equipment rental, transportation, superintendence, and 
services as are  necessary to perform all Work in the Bid 
Category(ies) stated in accordance with the Contract 
Documents.
256
carefully examined the Bidding Documents and the si
t
If identified as one of the apparent lowest bidder(s) for a 
Bid Category Bidder agrees to meet immediately with 
CM and  shall submit post bid information as described 
in Section 00200 Instructions to Bidders.
Bidder, if awarded a contract, agrees to execute 
Agreement within fifteen (15) days of receiving notice of 
the award
Bidder, if awarded a contract, agrees to provide 
full compliance with the Contract Documents
Bidder, if awarded a contract, agrees to commence Work 
upon execution of the Agreement or at such other time as 
directed in the notice of award
Bidder, if awarded a contract, agrees to complete its 
Work in accordance with the Contract Documents and 
within the milestone activity dates and durations set  forth 
in the Bidding Documents and subsequent construction 
project master schedule established by CM.
Bidder has included required Iran Sanctions Form fou
in the Box shared folder.
Bidder has included required Familial Disclosure Form 
found in the Box shared folder. 
Warranties Included (if applicable)? 
Permits Included (if applicable, please list)? 
Sales Tax Included? 
Insurance Coverage and Limits acknowledged and w
be provided
Have you visited the site? 
Cleanup Included per BMC Clean Up Procedures 
Proposed Major Subs? 
Bidder has read, understood, and included in it's bid all 
documents in the shared folder including drawings, 
specifications, addenda, and other documents. 
Bidder has read, understood, and included Addendum
3 
BOND INFORMATION
Current EMR Rating? 
Bonding Company? (with rating)
LABOR RATES
Foreman (Includes all allowable OH&P).
Journeyman (Includes all allowable OH&P).
Apprentice (Includes all allowable OH&P).
Summary
257
performance/payment bonds and insurance certificat
e
BP#2: Troy School District Early Childhood Center BP#2
Prepared by Barton Malow Company 
Joint Sealants D.C. Byers Company, Inc. RAM Construction Services of Minnesota,  LLC BNE
Generated September 18th 2018 Submitted by Chad Wilson Submitted by Dave Diatikar Submitted by Evan  Anton
Submitted Total $28,978 $35,680 $38,000
Original Proposal, September 6th 2018 Original Proposal, Septemb er 18th 2018 Original Proposal, September 18th 2018
LINE ITEMS Unit Qty Unit Cost Total Cost Unit Qty Unit Cost Total Cost Unit Qty Unit  Cost Total Cost
Base Bid (Including Bond) $28,978 $35,680 $38,000
Subtotal $28,978 $35,680 $38,000
SCOPE-SPECIFIC INFORMATION
How much did you include in your base bid 
alllowance? (see work scopes) 0 0 N/A
Voluntary Alternate No. 1 0 N/A
Voluntary Alternate No. 2 0 N/A
Voluntary Alternate No. 3 0 N/A
If awarded multiple bid categories, deduct this amoun
a combined bid discount 0 N/A
258
BP#2: Troy School District Early Childhood Center BP#2
Prepared by Barton Malow Company 
Roller Shades MSC Blinds & Shades, Inc. Bayvue Drapery Company The Sheer Shop Fi ve Star Window Tinting
Generated September 18th 2018 Submitted by Mike Huizen Submitted by Linda Vancamp Submitted by Jessica Cole Submitted by Debbie Gr aham
Submitted Total $21,750 $26,448 $30,163 $51,680
Revision #1, September 18th 2018 Original Proposal, September 17 th 2018 Original Proposal, September 17th 2018 Revision #2, Septe mber 14th 2018
LINE ITEMS Unit Qty Unit Cost Total Cost Unit Qty Unit Cost Total Cost Unit Qty Unit  Cost Total Cost Unit Qty Unit Cost Total Cost
Base Bid (Including Bond) Disqualified due to missing forms $21,750 Disqualified due to missing forms $26,448 $30,163 $51,680
Subtotal $21,750 $26,448 $30,163 $51,680
SCOPE-SPECIFIC INFORMATION
How much did you include in your base bid for 
alllowance? (see work scopes) N/A 0.00 N/A
Voluntary Alternate No. 1 -$4,598 (deduct) to use Draper Clutch FlexShade and D4 3% open fabric i
Voluntary Alternate No. 2 0.00
Voluntary Alternate No. 3 0.00
If awarded multiple bid categories, deduct this 
amount as a combined bid discount 0.00
259
BP#2: Troy School District Early Childhood Center BP#2
Prepared by Barton Malow Company
Access Control MCMI
Generated September 18th 2018 Submitted by Mary Kay Savalle
Submitted Total $86,225
Original Proposal, September 17th 2018
LINE ITEMS Unit Qty Unit Cost Total Cost
Base Bid (Including Bond) $86,225
Subtotal $86,225
SCOPE-SPECIFIC INFORMATION
How much did you include in your base bid for 
alllowance? (see work scopes) $0
Voluntary Alternate No. 1
Voluntary Alternate No. 2
Voluntary Alternate No. 3
If awarded multiple bid categories, deduct this 
amount as a combined bid discount
260
BP#2: Troy School District Early Childhood Center BP#2
Prepared by Barton Malow Company 
Joint Sealants D.C. Byers Company, Inc. RAM Construction Services of Minnesota,  LLC BNE
Generated September 18th 2018 Submitted by Chad Wilson Submitted by Dave Diatikar Submitted by Evan  Anton
Submitted Total $28,978 $35,680 $38,000
Original Proposal, September 6th 2018 Original Proposal, Septemb er 18th 2018 Original Proposal, September 18th 2018
LINE ITEMS Unit Qty Unit Cost Total Cost Unit Qty Unit Cost Total Cost Unit Qty Unit  Cost Total Cost
Base Bid (Including Bond) $28,978 $35,680 $38,000
Subtotal $28,978 $35,680 $38,000
SCOPE-SPECIFIC INFORMATION
How much did you include in your base bid 
alllowance? (see work scopes) 0 0 N/A
Voluntary Alternate No. 1 0 N/A
Voluntary Alternate No. 2 0 N/A
Voluntary Alternate No. 3 0 N/A
If awarded multiple bid categories, deduct this amoun
a combined bid discount 0 N/A
261
 8.D. 10.16.18 
8. BUSINESS 
D.  CONSIDERATION: International Academy Paving 
Improvements 
A RFP was issued to obtain competitive bids for site improvement work 
at International Academy East/Baker Middle School.  Bid responses were 
reviewed by Rob Carson, Director of Operations and Barton Malow, and 
it is recommended the bid be awarded as stated below.  
 RECOMMENDED ACTION:  Accept the resolution below. 
SUGGESTED RESOLUTION 
 Moved by:   
 Supported by: 
 Be it therefore resolved  that the bid for site improvement  work be 
awarded to Best Asphalt, Inc.  in the amount of $ 63,525.00 and that th is 
amount be approved as an expenditure of the of the Building Site and 
Sinking Project Fund. 
 Yes: 
 No: 
262
Memorandum 
 TO:       Rick West - Asst. Superintendent - Business Services  
Operations 
 FROM:  Rob Carson – Director of Maintenance & Operations   
Department 
RE:       RFP – 9863 – Bid Pack 2 – BSSF – IAE/Site Work   
1140 Rankin 
Troy, MI 48083 
Ph: 248.823.4050 
DATE:   September 27, 2018 
Fax: 248.823.4077 
An RFP (Bid 98 63) was issued  to obtain competitive bids for 
Site Improvement work at International Academy East/Baker Schools.  The scope of the work 
is to reconstruct the Boyd entrance drive so that it can safely handle two -way traffic along 
with a pedestrian walk .  Please see the  attached bid results summary sheet and a contract 
award recommendation from the Barton Malow Company.  The RFP resulted in 4 bid responses 
and competitive pricing.  
I am recommending the following vendor based on low qualified bidder. 
Category    Contractor        Amount 
320000 Sitework   Best Asphalt, Inc.     $ 57,750.00  
Contingency           $   5,775.00 
TOTAL RECOMMENDED AWARDS  $ 63,525.00 
All proposals were reviewed and qualified by Barton Malow and PEA Inc.  
A Purchase Order will be issued to Best Asphalt for this project.  The funding for this project 
will be Building & Site Sinking Funds. 
If you have any questions, please let me know.  
Cc:  Purchasing Department – File  
Atts:  Bid Summary, Barton Malow Contract Award Recommendation  
263
                Barton Malow Company 
                                                                                          26500 American Drive – Southfield, Michigan  48034 – p 248.4365000 – f 248.436.5001  
September 27, 2018 
Mr. Rick West, Assistant of Business Services 
Troy School District 
1140 Rankin 
Troy, MI  48083 
Re:  Bid Package 2 – Sinking Fund:  Troy Schools Intl Academy East Drive Improvements 
       Contract Award Recommendations 
Dear Mr. West: 
Bid proposals were received for the Troy Schools sinking fund project bid package No. 2 
International Academy East Drive Improvements on September 25, 2018.  Four bids were 
received for the sitework bid category. 
The proposal and qualifications of the apparent low bidder is listed below and has been reviewed 
during a post-bid interview.  A bid tabulation for the bids received is attached. 
Work Scope Category Contractor Name     Amount 
320000 Sitework   Best Asphalt, Inc.     $ 57,750.00 
TOTAL AWARD         $ 57,750.00 
Please contact me should you have any questions. 
Sincerely, 
Christa Amalio 
BMC Project Manager 
Attachment:  Bid Tabulation  
cc:  Mr. Robert Carson – TSD 
       Mrs. Michelle Kerns 
264
BP#2: Troy Schools Sinking Fund BP#2 IAE Drive Improvements
Prepared by Barton Malow Company 
Project Location: 1291 Torpey Drive, Troy, MI, 48083, US
Sitework Best Asphalt Inc. Asphalt Specialists, Inc. Nagle Paving Company C ortis Brothers Trucking & Excavating
Generated September 25th 2018 Submitted by Phil Nichols Submitted  by Paul Myers Submitted by Brian  Leach Submitted by Robert John son
Submitted Total $57,750 $65,900 $68,890 $68,900
Original Proposal, September 25th 2018 Original Proposal, Septem ber 25th 2018 Original Proposal, September 25th 2018 Revision #2,  September 25th 2018
LINE ITEMS Unit Qty Unit Cost Total Cost Unit Qty Unit Cost Total Cost Unit Qty Unit  Cost Total Cost Unit Qty Unit Cost Total Cost
Base Bid (Including Bond) $57,750 $65,900 $68,890 $68,900
Subtotal $57,750 $65,900 $68,890 $68,900
SCOPE-SPECIFIC INFORMATION
Voluntary Alternate No. 1 n/a
Voluntary Alternate No. 2 n/a
265
  8. E.  10.16.18 
8. BUSINESS 
E.  CONSIDERATION:   PURCHASE AGREEMENT Wattles Rd. Property 
 RECOMMENDED ACTION:  Approve the resolution below. 
SUGGESTED RESOLUTION 
Moved By: ______________________________ 
Supported By: ______________________________ 
 WHEREAS, the Scho ol District desires has marketed and desires to sell the 
parcel of land that with the following legal description: 
PART OF THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SECTION 14, TOWN 2 NORTH, RANGE 11 EAST, 
CITY OF TROY, OAKLAND COUNTY, MICHIGAN, BEING MORE PARTICULARLY 
DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS: BEGINNING AT A POINT ON THE NORTH RIGHT -OF-WAY 
LINE OF E. WATTLES ROAD (WIDTH VARIES) BEING DISTANT NORTH 88 DEGREES 
40 MINUTES 52 SECONDS WEST, 1550.47 FEET ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID 
SECTION 14 AND NORTH 00 DEGREES 26 MINUTES 24 SECONDS  EAST, 60.01 FEET 
FROM THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF SAID SECTION 14; THENCE NORTH 88 DEGREES 
40 MINUTES 52 SECONDS WEST 237.09 FEET ALONG THE NORTH RIGHT -OF-WAY 
LINE OF SAID E. WATTLES ROAD; THENCE SOUTH 00 DEGREES 26 MINUTES 24 
SECONDS WEST 60.01 FEET TO A POI NT ON THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID SECTION 14; 
THENCE NORTH 88 DEGREES 40 MINUTES 52 SECONDS WEST 60.00 FEET ALONG 
SAID SOUTH LINE; THENCE NORTH 00 DEGREES 26 MINUTES 24 SECONDS EAST 
203.96 FEET; THENCE NORTH 89 DEGREES 52 MINUTES 26 SECONDS EAST 295.10 
FEET; THENCE SOUTH 00 DEGREES 18 MINUTES 09 SECONDS EAST 151.43 FEET TO 
THE POINT OF BEGINNING. 
CONTAINING: 47,324.04 SQ. FT. OR 1.086 ACRES OF LAND 
  and 
 WHEREAS, the School District has received an Offer To Purchase this property 
from Madhu Babu Jampala, (the “Purchaser”), to purchase the Premises for a purchase 
price of Two Hundred Seventy Five Thousand and 00/100 ($275,000.00) Dollars , (the 
“Purchase Price”), with an earnest money deposit of Ten Thousand and 00/100 
($10,000.00) Dollars; and 
266
  8. E.  10.16.18 
 WHEREAS, the S chool District has reviewed the Offer and is desirous of 
accepting said Offer and authorizing the sale of the Premises on terms substantially 
similar to those described in the Offer, which Offer is attached hereto and incorporated 
herein by reference as Exhibit A.   
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED THAT: 
 1. The School District authorizes the sale of the Premises on terms 
substantially similar to the terms contained in the attached Offer. 
2. The Superintendent of the School District, or his designee, is hereby 
authorized to execute the Offer and any and all documents necessary 
and incidental to the sale of the Premises on behalf of the School District. 
YES: MEMBERS:           
NO: MEMBERS:           
ABSTAIN: MEMBERS:           
RESOLUTION DECLARED ADOPTED    
       ____________________________ 
      Secretary, Board of Education  
 I hereby certify that the foregoing constitutes a true and complete copy of 
a resolution duly adopted by the Board of Education of the Troy School District, County 
of Oakland, Michigan, at a regular meeting held on the 1 6th day of October, 2018 and 
that said meeting was conducted and public notice of said meeting was given pursuant 
to and in full compliance with the Open Meeting Act, being Act 267, Public Acts of 
Michigan, 1976, and that the minutes of said meeting were kept and will be or have 
been made available as required by said Act.  
       ____________________________ 
       Secretary, Board of Education  
267
  8. E.  10.16.18 
EXHIBIT A 
Madhu Babu Jampala 
OFFER TO PURCHASE REAL ESTATE 
[ATTACHED] 
268
269
270
271
272
273
                              10. A. 10.16.18 
10.  OTHER 
A. CONSIDERATION:  NSBA Advocacy Institute Conference  
               Attendance 
As required by Board Policy 1000.01, Organization and Functioning of the 
Board; Reimbursement of Expenses, “Any expenditure of District funds for 
members for out -of-state meetings must have prior approval by 
resolution.”  Board Secretary Gary Hauff and Board Trustee Elizabeth 
Hammond, ha ve indicated their desire to attend the National School 
Boards Association (NSBA) Advocacy Institute Conference, which will be 
held in Washington, D.C., from January 27  - 29, 201 9. Therefore, the 
Board is being asked to consider the following resolution.   
RECOMMENDED ACTION:  Adopt the following resolution. 
SUGGESTED RESOLUTION 
   Moved by  
   Supported by  
Be it therefore resolved that the Board of Education takes action to approve Mr. 
Hauff and Mrs. Hammond’s  attendance as representative s of the Troy Board of 
Education at the NSBA Advocacy Institute Conference in Wash ington, D.C., from  
January 27 - 29, 2019. 
YES:      
NO:      
274
275
276
277
278
                                     11. A. 10.16.18 
11. A. CLOSED SESSION 
CONSIDERATION:  Attorney-Client Privilege 
The Board must pass a resolution to go into closed session  to discuss an attorney-
client privilege. Following the passage of the resolution, the Board of Education will go 
into closed session.  No additional business will take place after this time, other than 
to officially adjourn the meeting. 
RECOMMENDED ACTION:  Adopt the following resolution. 
   Moved by  
   Supported by  
Be it therefore resolved  that, as permitted in the Michigan Open Meetings Act, 
Public Act 267, Section 8 (c), the Troy Board of Education shall go into closed session 
to discuss an attorney-client privilege. 
Roll call vote.  
Schmidt 
Fleming 
Gottlieb 
Hammond 
Hauff 
Miletti 
Philippart 
279
