 Social Workers hired before October 17, 2006). 
employed as school psychologists and school social workers shall be entitled to payment according to 
the MA+30 track of Schedule A in the Collective Bargaining Agreement providing that: 
A. He/She has completed a master's degree plus thirty (30) semester hours: 
B. The school psychologist has completed a master's degree in psychology and the master's 
program required at least sixty (60) semester hours of credit; and/or 
C. The school social worker has completed a master's degree in social work (MSW generally 
requires at least a sixty (60) semester hour program in social work). 
C.  
ARTICLE 28. PROTECTION OF TEACHERS 
teacher's responsibility. The Board and Administration will give reasonable support and assistance to 
teachers with respect to the maintenance of control and discipline in the classroo m. Whenever it 
appears that a particular pupil requires the attention of special counselors, social workers,  alternative 
education placement, or law enforcement personnel, the teacher shall advise the principal in writing. 
Having been advised the principal  will schedule a building team (teacher, social worker, principal, 
psychologist, etc.) meeting. The meeting will be held without undue delay. 
82  
218
3. .7, .8, .9 to a higher full step 
The Troy Education Association and the Troy School District understand and agree that teachers 
28.1 Classroom Control. The authority and effectiveness in the classroom shall be primarily the 
Formatted: Space After:  12 pt
Formatted: Space After:  12 pt
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0", Space After:  12 pt
28.2 Assault Charges. Teachers shall observe such rules concerning punishment of students as may 
be established by the Board. In the event civil proceedings are brought against a teacher alleging that 
he/she committed an assault in the course of this employment, he/she will be provided legal counsel 
by the Board. 
28.3 Injury. For injury sustained on duty, see Article 26.3, Worker's Compensation, and Article 
26.1 A, Long Term Disability. 
28.4 Safety and Liability. Teachers shall be expected to exercise reasonable care with respect to 
the safety of pupils and property, but shall not be individually liable to the Board for damage or loss 
to person or property except in the case of gross negligence. 
28.5 Legal Counsel. Upon request of a teacher who is assaulted as a result of classroom or 
extracurricular duties, the Board will provide preliminary legal counsel, but not representation. 
28.6 Teachers are not required to enter a "bomb scare" building until the building has been declared 
safe by the police department. 
28.7 Working time lost by a teacher as a result of school -work connected assaults or charges of 
assault shall not result in loss of salary or leave time, unless the teacher is found guilty. 
28.8 A teacher shall be reimbursed for loss, damage or destruction of clothing or personal property 
as a result of theft, vandalism or assault related to teaching duties unless due to negligence or criminal 
guilt of the teacher, if such loss exceeds fifteen dollars ($15.00) and does not exceed one hundred 
dollars ($100.00). The application shall be in the form of a letter within one school/work week of the 
damage, and shall be made before the end of the fiscal year (June 30). 
In all cases, adequate proof of loss or a sworn affidavit must be submitted with the claim. In addition, a 
police report must be filed in all cases involving theft of personal property and damage to an 
automobile. The Board or school administrators shall assist teachers in attempting to obtain restitution 
for damages or loss occurring on school premises during the time of employment. 
In the event there is a dispute involving a claim in this section, the matter shall be referred to the 
Professional Relations Committee for determination.  
83  
219
termination of employment from the Troy Schools, receive severance pay in the amount of one half 
(1/2) of the per diem rate of pay for unused sick days provided for in Article 18 to a maximum 
accumulation of sixty (60) days. Thirty (30) additional unused sick days will be paid for at the current 
guest/substitute teacher pay rate to tenure teachers with ten or more years of seniority in the Troy 
School District. All tenure teachers with less than ten years of seniority in the Troy School District 
shall upon termination of employment from the Troy School District receive severance pay in the 
amount of the current guest/substitute teacher pay rate for unused sick days provided for in Article 18 
to a maximum accumulation of ninety (90) days. Probationary teachers are not eligible for severance 
pay. Severance pay shall be paid within two (2) pay periods of request for said severance pay. Such 
request shall be made within twelve (12) months of termination. Severance pay will not be paid in 
cases where proper notice of leaving was not given or where illegal or immoral or other unethical 
conduct by the employee is involved. A teacher whose severance payment is five  thousand dollars 
($5,000.00) or more shall have said payment deposited into a 403 (b) offered through the District. 
84  
220
ARTICLE 29. SEVERANCE PAY AND RETIREMENT/RESIGNATION 
29.1 All tenure teachers with ten or more years of senio rity in the Troy School District shall upon 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.78", Widow/Orphan control
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0", Space After:  12 pt
29.2 All teachers who retire with ten (10) or more years of service in Troy shall, at their option, be 
paid severance pay as set forth below in lieu of pay for accumulated sick leave.  A teacher whose 
severance payment is five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more shall have said payment deposited into 
a 403 (b) plan offered through the District 
10-14 years’ service - $1,000.00 
15-19 years’ service - $1,500.00 
20 or more years - $100.00/per year 
29.3 In case of death during a teacher's employment, the teacher's beneficiary on his/her retirement 
card shall receive either severance pay under 29.1 or severance pay in lieu of pay for accumulated sick 
leave under 28.2, whichever is greater, but not both. 
29.4 Mid-Year Notice Requirement. A teacher resigning or retiring must give a minimum of 
ninety (90) days’ notice in order to be eligible for severance, except in extenuating circumstances 
including, but not limited to, death of a family  member, spousal job transfer/relocation, and other 
family crisis. Teachers providing less than the 90-workday notice, but more than 30-days’ notice, shall 
receive a prorated severance payment; i.e., a teacher giving 89 -days’ notice shall be eligible  for 
89/90ths of the severance benefit. Teachers giving less than 30-days’ notice shall not be entitled to any 
severance benefit, assuming there are no extenuating circumstances. A written notice should be sent 
to the Assistant Superintendent, Employee Services. 
29.5 End-of-Year Notice Requirement. Teachers resigning or retiring prior to the start of the next 
school year must give notice by March 30 th (90 days prior to the end of the preceding school year). 
Teachers providing less than the 90 -workday notice, but more than 30 -days’ notice, shall receive a 
prorated severance payment; i.e., a teacher giving 89-days’ notice shall be eligible for 89/90ths of the 
severance benefit. Teachers giving less than 30 -days’ notice shall not be entitled to any severance 
benefit, assuming there are no extenuating circumstances. A written notice should be sent to the 
Assistant Superintendent, Employee Services.  
85  
221
Formatted: Normal, Indent: Left:  0.11",  No bullets or
ARTICLE 30. MASTER SICK BANK 
numbering
30.1 Master Sick Bank Plan. The procedure for the administration of the Master Sick Bank shall be 
in accordance with the following provisions and shall be for the use and benefit of all eligible teachers 
who apply and whose applications are subsequently approved for sick day(s) benefits. 
30.2 Funding of Sick Bank. The Master Sick Bank shall be funded in accordance with the following 
provisions: 
A. Teachers newly employed by the School District shall have one sick day of their  advance 
current allowance transferred to the Master Sick Bank at the beginning of their 
employment. 
B. The maximum number of sick days in the Master Sick Bank shall be twice the number  of 
teachers in the bargaining unit. 
86  
222
29.5  
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
C. The above one sick day transferred to the Master Sick Bank from the current allowance of a 
teacher, or any other sick days so transferred, shall not be deducted from the days remaining 
in the Master Sick Bank at the time a teacher terminates his/her employment with the 
School District. 
D. If the number of days in the Master Sick Bank falls below 25 percent of the maximum 
funding of days prior to the end of any school year, the TEA will notify the Board to make a 
transfer of one (1) more day from each teacher's current allowance to the Master Sick Bank. 
30.3 Eligibility - Master Sick Bank. Any teacher shall be eligible to make application to the Sick 
Bank Committee for sick days of benefit after he/she has been incapacitated for at least fifteen (15) 
consecutive working days and has used all of his/her own allowance. If a teacher is incapacitated for 
at least fifteen (15) working days (not necessa rily consecutive working days) in any one (1) year  and 
there is a further incapacitation which appears to be a recurrence of the same illness or accident and 
the same doctor who handled the case originally verified by written statement that such incapacitation 
is a recurrence, then the fifteen (15) consecutive day eligibility requirement could be waived in this 
instance at the discretion of the Sick Bank Committee. 
30.4 Application. Each application for sick days of benefit from the Master Sick Bank must be 
submitted on the Sick Bank Application form to the Sick Bank Committee, and such application will 
be approved or rejected on the basis of  the individual teacher's circumstances. All applications must 
be accompanied by supporting doctor's statements. 
30.5 Sick Bank Committee.  The Sick Bank committee shall be composed of three (3) teachers to  
be selected in any manner determined by the TEA and two (2) administrators to be selected by the 
Board. They shall hold membership on the committee for such terms as the TEA may determine. Any 
application approval by the Committee shall be by a majority vote of the entire Committee. 
30.6 Administration. The Master Sick Bank shall be administered by the Sick Bank Committee in 
accordance with the following provisions: 
A. No teacher shall be allowed more than the number of days needed to satisfy the waiting 
period for LTD benefit from the Sick Bank in any school year.  
87  
223
Formatted: Normal, Indent: Left:  0.49",  No bullets or
B. The form authorizing an award of sick days from the Master Sick Bank to a teacher which 
numbering
is sent to the Board for payment must be accompanied by supporting doctor statements 
used by the Committee in making their decision (for Board review) and signed by three 
(3) members of the Sick Bank Committee and d one of the following: 
1. President of the Troy Education Association 
2. Executive Director of the Troy Education Association 
Said forms shall be sent to the Board within five (5) days of authorization. 
C. The records of the Master Sick Bank shall be audited at the end of each school year by a 
committee composed of three (3) members, with one member each to be appointed by the 
Board, by the TEA, and by the Sick Bank Committee. A copy of the audit report shall be 
furnished to the Board, TEA and Sick Bank Committee. 
30.7 Board Retention of Sick Days. All sick leave days accumulated by any teacher in his/her 
current allowance or those days transferred to the Master Sick Bank from his/her current allowance 
shall be subject only to the contingent liability of actual sick claim use by the teacher or the Master 
88  
224
A.  
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Justified
30.8 Sick Bank. The Board recognizes that the Sick Bank Committee's decisions cannot be reversed 
by the Board. 
ARTICLE 31. ANNEXATION AND CONSOLIDATION 
In the event that the Troy School District is forcibly or voluntarily annexed or consolidated through 
action taken by the courts, the State of Michigan, State Board of Education, Intermediate School 
District to or with another district(s), teachers of the Troy School District shall retain seniority  rights 
and their tenure status or probationary sta tus that would have been afforded had no annexation or 
consolidation taken place. 
Annexation or consolidation through action taken by courts, the State of Michigan, State Board of 
Education, Intermediate School District, or electorate shall not cause a teacher to lose or reduce leave 
rights, salary, salary status, fringe benefits, employment, or other rights provided for in this Agreement. 
ARTICLE 32. DISTRICT ORGANIZATION 
32.1 Departments. 
A. The assignment of each teacher shall be consistent with primary teacher responsibility. ESL 
teachers shall be assigned to a department within their building based on certification.  
89  
225
30.7 Sick Bank. All sick leave days which are not used by the teacher or the Master Sick Bank during the 
period of his/her employment shall not be subject to any other type or kind of claim in any form whatsoever by 
the teacher or the TEA when his/her employment has terminated. shall be subject only to the contingent 
liability of actual sick claim use by the teacher or the Master Sick Bank  All sick leave days which are 
not used by the teacher or the Master Sick Bank during the period of his/her employment shall not be 
subject to any other type or kind of claim in any form whatsoever by the teacher or the TEA when 
his/her employment has terminated. 
Formatted: List Paragraph, Left, Indent: First line:  0",
Right:  0.21", Space Before:  0 pt, Outline numbered +
Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 1 +
Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.39" + Indent at:  0.11",
Tab stops:  0.61", Left
Formatted: Left:  0.65", Right:  0.75", Top:  0.61",
Bottom:  0.65", Footer distance from edge:  0.49"
90  
A.  
B. Every teacher in each high school shall be assigned by the building administration to a 
department headed by a department chairperson within that building as listed below: 
 
1. Math 
2. Social Studies 
3. Science 
4. English/Library/Media/Speech 
5. Business 
6. Physical Education 
7. Counselors 
8. Vocational Education: Industrial Arts, 
Vocational Education, Home Economics 
9. Foreign Language 
10. Special Education 
11. Fine Arts: Arts, Music (Vocal and 
Instrumental), Drama 
11.12. Learning Disability 
Teacher Consultants 
C. Every teacher in each middle school shall be assigned by the building administrator to a 
department headed by a department chairperson within that building as listed below: 
 
1. 1.  Math 
2. 2.  Science 
1. 3.  Social 
StudiesMath 
2.3. Science 
  
English/Library/Media/Reading/Speech
Social Studies 
4.  
 English/Library/Media/Reading/Speech5
.    Special Education (Resource 
Room) 
3. 6.    Learning Disability Teacher 
Consultants 
D. Every teacher eligible for district-wide departments shall be assigned by the Administration 
to a department headed by a department chairperson (*Special Education shall have two 
department heads). 
Department Heads for middle school level district-wide shall be: 
 
1. Foreign Language 
2. Home Living 
3. Special Education/Resource 
Room (*2)Learning 
Disability Teacher 
Consultants 
4. Business 
5. Counselors 
6. Physical Education 
7. Industrial Arts Education and Vocational 
Education 
8. Fine Arts: Music (Vocal & Instrumental), 
Drama, Art 
9. Special Education/Categorical Program 
Teachers (6-12) 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.86",  No bullets or
numbering
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.93", Hanging:  0.31",
Numbered + Level: 1 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.13" +
Indent at:  0.38", Tab stops:  1.18", Left + Not at  1.13"
Formatted: Space After:  12 pt
226
Bottom:  0.65"
1. Special Education (Resource Room) 
2. Fine Arts (Art/Music) 
3. Physical Education 
4.5.Learning Disability Teacher Consultants 
F. One (1) district level department head for itinerant staff department (Social Workers, 
Psychologists, Speech Pathologists, Learning Disabilities Teacher Consultants.) 
G. One (1) district level department head for media staff. 
32.2 Department Head Qualifications. 
A. Must be a tenure teacher or, in the case of non-certificated personnel, must have completed a 
probationary period equivalent to the probationary period prescribed by the Tenure Act for 
certificated teachers, unless there are none available. 
B. Must be a teacher within the department headed. 
C. Shall have taught the previous year within the department headed, except in new buildings 
or a reorganized school. 
D. Should have a major or minor in one of the areas of the department unless there are no 
teachers with said major or minor available. 
E. Qualifications for special education itinerant department head: 
1. An individual possessing a teaching certificate must have completed his/her 
probationary period at the time of selection to the department head position. 
2. An individual who does not possess a teaching certificate must have completed a 
probationary period equivalent to the probationary period prescribed by the Tenure Act 
for certified teachers. 
32.3 Department Head Selection. 
A. The department heads shall be elected by secret ballot of the eligible department members 
during the last ten (10) days of the teachers' school year. The term of office shall be two 
the election itself. It shall require a majority of those eligible to vote to be elected. 
B. If during the school year a vacancy occurs in the position, the same election procedure shall 
be applied to elect a department head to finish the unexpired term. 
C. A new election may be called by a majority of the eligible department members by a signed 
petition. Should an election take place, it shall be held within five (5) school days. 
unexpired term. 
91  
227
E. Department heads for elementary level district-wide shall be: 
4. Special Education/Categorical Program Teachers (Early On, Early Childhood, K-5) 
(2) years. To elect, all department members must be notified at least three (3) days prior to 
D. The same election procedure shall be applied to elect a department head to finish the 
Formatted: Left:  0.65", Right:  0.75", Top:  0.61",
Formatted: Font: Times New Roman, 12 pt
Formatted: Justified, Indent: First line:  0"
Formatted: Space After:  12 pt
32.4 Department Head Duties. 
A. Shall be a member of the building curriculum committee if such a committee does exist. 
B. Shall hold regular meetings with the members of the department to keep them informed on 
matters of concern to them. 
C. Shall assist new teachers in becoming familiar with the school and the department and their 
particular responsibilities. 
D. Shall be responsible for the supervision and coordination of the curriculum of the 
department to include coordination of textbook selection. 
E. Shall serve as a liaison between the individuals of the department a nd the administration 
when necessary. 
F. Shall forward requisitions and requests from within the department to the building 
principal. 
G. Shall perform such other miscellaneous duties that are requested by the members of the 
department and the administration that may be deemed reasonable and proper. 
H. Shall serve as a member of the Secondary Curriculum Committee if such a committee 
exists. Elementary department heads shall serve as a member of any curriculum committee 
relating to their department if such a committee exists. 
I. Each department shall hold regular departmental meetings as frequently as is necessary to 
keep its members informed of matters of mutual concern and to maintain the orderly 
operation of the department. Such meetings will be scheduled by the department head at 
such times as are mutually agreeable to as many members of the department as possible. 
All department members shall normally be expected to attend such meetings. When a 
member cannot attend the meeting, the member shall notify the chairperson in advance. 
J. Schedule for itinerant staff (art, music, physical education) shall be prepared by their 
department heads subject to the approval of the administrator in charge of the area of 
instruction. 
K. Any committee work directly related to the responsibilities of the department head listed 
above will not count as a committee assignment under Article 6, Section 6.2B. 
32.5 Release Time. Each department head shall have release time dependent on the number of 
department members. A department head with nine (9) or fewer members in his/her department shall 
be provided up to nine (9) half days per year. A department head with ten (10) or more in the 
department shall be provided up to fourteen (14) half days per year. The department head shall notify 
the principal in advance those days he/she wishes to utilize. The department shall notify the sub caller 
for release days. 
32.6 Head Teacher, Elementary. 
elementary permanent, provisional or professional certificate with at least three (3) years 
teaching experience at the elementary level. 
92  
228
A. Qualification for Head Teacher. An applicant for the head teacher position must have an 
Formatted: Space After:  12 pt
B. The position of head teacher shall be reopene d every two years. All applicants will be 
interviewed by the building principal. Following these interviews, the building principal 
will appoint a head teacher whom he/she feels best meets the needs of the building. 
C. Suggested Duties: 
1. The head teacher shall  be in charge of the building during the absence of the 
principal. 
2. The head teacher shall make decisions within the scope of the normal procedures 
and policies set for the building by the principal and Central Office. 
3. The head teacher's workday shall begi n thirty (30) minutes before the entry of the 
children, and end thirty (30) minutes after the close of school. 
4. The head teacher shall assist the principal with the discipline problems of the 
building. He/she shall handle minor discipline problems within the building and all 
discipline problems when the principal is unavailable. 
5. The head teacher will be responsible for preparing and keeping up to date all teacher 
duty schedules. He/she shall keep the principal informed of same. 
6. The head teacher will  be responsible for correct procedures regarding arrival and 
departure of children and buses. 
8. The head teacher shall have the responsibility  of seeing that all accident forms are 
properly filled out. 
9. The head teacher shall inform the principal of the general tone of the building, and 
report any areas of concern by the staff. 
10. During inclement or extremely cold weather when students come into the building 
before the start of school the head teacher may be put on duty to handle these 
children. 
11. The head teacher shall acquaint himself/herself with the coordination of all services 
to the school. 
12. The head teacher shall be provided an opportunity to gain administrative experience 
in the following areas: (a) pupil records; (b) requisitions; (c) referrals; 
(d) proposals to Central Office; and (e) conduct some faculty meetings. 
13. Since all of these listed duties cannot be handled at the same time by any one head 
teacher, it is the responsibility of the building principal to decide what duties shall 
be under the direction of the head teacher. 
ARTICLE 33. RETIREMENT 
33.1 Mandatory retirement, if any, shall comply with applicable federal law. 
33.2 A person must be employed by the Troy School District on the last working day prior to date 
93  
229
7. The head teacher shall be responsible for noon hour supervision. Noon aides will 
be instructed to go to the head teacher with problems. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.11", Right:  0.22",
Widow/Orphan control
of retirement. (Also see Article 29. Severance Pay and Retirement/Resignation.) 
94  
230
34.1 Teachers may volunteer for shared-timeshared time or part -time assignments by making 
application to the Assistant Superintendent, Employee Services on or before March 1 for the ensuing 
school year. Teachers requesting and being gra nted shared-timeshared time or part-time assignments 
shall be notified at least thirty- (30-) calendar days before the assignment begins. 
34.2 No shared-timeshared time or part-time assignments shall come into existence without approval 
of the Superintendent or his/her designee. Once approved by the Superintendent or his/her designee, a 
shared-timeshared time or part-time assignment shall not terminate during the school year without the 
approval of the Superintendent or his/her designee, except in case of resignation or termination of one 
or both of the teachers sharing the assignment. In case of such resignation or termination, the 
Superintendent or his/her designee shall have the right, in his/her discretion, to continue the shared-
timeshared time or part-time assignment. 
34.3 A shared-timeshared time or part -time assignment may be continued for an additional school 
year by agreement between the teachers involved and the superintendent or his/her designee. 
34.4 The termination of shared-timeshared time or part-time assignments by the Superintendent or 
his/her designee shall not be considered an involuntary transfer. 
34.5 Compensation. 
A. Shared timeShared time or part-time teachers shall be compensated in proration of the salary 
they would be entitled to if they held a full-time assignment. 
position exceed the total cost of the benefits paid to a full-time teacher for the same position. 
1. Life insurance as provided in Article 26.1. 
2. Health: The mutually agreed upon MESSA health insurance plans found on the 
Employee Services Intranet and District Transparency Report. This medical insurance 
shall be provided for the employee, spouse, and/or eligible dependents. The Board shall 
pay the same proration of the premium paid for salary for these insurances as provided 
in Article 26.1, and the teacher shall pay the remaining portion of the premium. Except 
in instances where the insurance will be a true group, a teacher at his/her option may 
use the dollar value of the Board's share of the premium cost to  be applied to the 
purchase of any combination of health, dental and/or vision insurance, with the teacher 
to pay any remaining portion of the premium for the desired coverage. 
3. Worker's Compensation as provided in Article 26.3. 
4. Long term disability insurance as provided in Article 26.1. 
insurance carrier. 
95  
231
ARTICLE 34. SHARED TEACHINGSHARED TIME OR PART-TIME OR PART-TIME 
B. Shared time Shared time or part -time teachers shall have the following fringe benefit 
options. In no case shall the total cost of the fringe benefits between teachers sharing a 
5. Fringe benefits delineated in this Article are subject to the terms and approval of the 
Formatted: Centered, Indent: Left:  0"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.38", Right: 
0.22", Widow/Orphan control
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0", Space After:  12 pt
34.6 Shared-timeShared time or part -time teachers will divide preparation/planning time, but their 
total preparation/planning time will not exceed the preparation/planning time of a full -time teacher. 
The number of preparations at secondary shall be no more than two per day for less than a full-day 
teacher unless the teacher requests or accepts more. The duty time for shared-timeshared time or part-
time teachers when added to the duty time of their shared-timeshared time or part-time partner, where 
appropriate, shall equal a full-time assignment. 
Shared-timeShared time or part -time teachers will be required to attend staff meetings, if the staff 
meeting is immediately preceding or following his/her schedule. If the staff meeting does not 
immediately precede or follow the teacher's schedule, the teacher shall attend the make-up meeting. If 
no make -up meeting is scheduled, the teacher is responsible for obtaining the faculty meeting 
information. Shared-timeShared time or part -time teachers shall also attend all parent conferences, 
open houses and serve on committees as provided for full-time teachers. No extra compensation shall 
be paid for the fulfillment of these duties. 
34.7 Shared timeShared time or part -time teachers will be allowed to share time by teaching one 
semester and having the shared-timeshared time or part -time partner teach the other semester. A 
teacher who is to teach the second semester must pay for fringe benefits prior to the commencement of 
the first semester if the teacher wishes to have coverage. 
34.8 For purposes of this Agreement, a teacher who has voluntarily become a less than full -time 
employee shall be considered shared-timeshared time or part-time. 
seniority credit. 
34.10 Sick Leave Days. 
A. Teachers in a shared-timeshared time or part -time position shall receive prorated sick leave  
days. 
B. Absences shall be deducted on a prorated basis. 
34.11 Shared-timeShared time or part -time teachers who do not teach daily shall fulfill the following 
workday obligations: 
.9 163 5.0 
.8 145 4.5 
.7 127 4.0 
.6 109 3.5 
.5 91 3.0 
.4 72 2.0 
.3 54 1.5 
.2 36 1.0 
.1 18 0.5 
96  
232
34.9 Seniority. Each teacher participating in  shared-timeshared time or part -time will receive full 
Full-time Equivalency 
1.0 
180 Student Days 
180 
6 Teacher Workdays 
6.0 
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0", Right:  0.23"
ARTICLE 35. TROY COLLEGE AND CAREER HIGH SCHOOL 
Collective Bargaining Agreement Application. 
The following articles and schedules contained in this collective bargaining agreement shall apply  in 
their entirety to the Troy College and Career High School teachers: 
Article 1. Recognition Article 23. Grievance Procedure 
Article 2. TEA Rights Article 24. Negotiation Procedures 
Article 3. Teacher Rights Article 25. Miscellaneous Provisions 
Article 4. Evaluation* Article 26. Insurance 
Article 7 Rights of Administration Article 27. Salary Schedule Application 
Article 8. Joint Responsibilities Article 28. Protection of Teachers 
Article 9. Health and Safety Article 29. Severance Pay and Retirement 
Article 18. Leave Pay Article 30. Master Sick Bank 
Article 19. Maternity, Childcare and Article 31. Annexation and Consolidation 
 Adoption Leave Article 32. District Organization 
Article 20. Leaves of Absence-General Article 33 Retirement 
Article 21. Sabbatical Leave Article 34.* Shared Teaching 
Article 22. Lines of Communication Article 36. Ancillary Staff 
  Article 38. Duration of Agreement 
  Schedules A, B, C and D. 
All references exclusively for Troy College and Career High School are contained in Article 35. Article 
35.10 Professional Qualifications and Assignments compares to Article 10 Professional Qualifications 
and Assignments in the main collective bargaining agreement; however, applicable parts  of Article 
35.10 apply to Troy College and Career High School while Article 10 applies to staff, schools and 
buildings other than Troy College and Career High School.  A number of 35.10.3 means that  Article 
10, Section 3 of the main collective bargaining agreement does not apply to Troy College and Career 
High School and its staff, whereas the terms and conditions in 35.10.3 do apply at Troy College and 
Career High School. If a listing for 35.10.1 does not appear, it means that Article 10, Section 1 of the  
main collective bargaining agreement applies to staff at Troy College and Career High School. 
35.1 Layoff*. At the sole discretion of administration teachers may be given the opportunity to  take a 
voluntary layoff. 
lasting more than five months shall satisfy the requirement of serving on two committees during the 
school year. Teachers may be requested to serve on district -wide, inter- and intraschool committees. 
This section is not intended to limit a teacher from voluntarily serving on any number of committees. 
Assignment to a North Central committee shall count as one committee. 
97  
233
35.2 Teacher Responsibilities. A teacher may be required to serve on no more than two  committees 
during the school year. The length of service in each activity shall not exceed five months. An activity 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", First line:  0", Right: 
0.21", Space After:  12 pt, Widow/Orphan control
35.3 Professional Compensation. 
A. School Calendar. For purposes of teacher compensation, the calendar shall constitute 193 
days inclusive of the six (6) paid holidays . To insure provision of the minimum number of 
days of student instruction as required by MCLA 388.1701, as amended from time to time, 
days of student instruction may be rescheduled and the necessary modifications to the school 
calendar will be made. If days of stude nt instruction need to be rescheduled to be in 
compliance with law, the parties shall meet and mutually agree to a revised calendar. 
B. Article 11, Section 4.D of the main contract shall not apply to Troy College and Career High 
School. 
35.4 Teaching Hours. 
A. On days immediately preceding school holidays and vacations, the teachers' day shall end at 
the close of the pupils' school day, except that the teachers should remain in the building until 
the buses have left the school grounds. On Fridays, unless it immedia tely precedes a school 
holiday or recess, teachers may leave six and one-half (6 ½) hours after the start of the student 
day. Teachers involved in scheduled TEA meetings shall be excused at the end of the pupils' 
school day, except that this practice shall not apply to more than five (5) days when the entire 
TEA membership is involved. 
B. Lunch Period. Teacher shall have a duty -free lunch period of 30 minutes, during  which 
they may leave the building. 
35.5 Class Size. 
Teaching Loads and Assignments, Troy College and Career High School. The maximum number of 
students per section, unless otherwise stated, shall not exceed twenty-five (25). 
A. The number of students in all lab classes shall not exceed the number of stations or  twenty- 
five (25), whichever is le ss. Science classes requiring a lab and computer classes are 
considered laboratory classes. 
B. Physical education classes shall have a maximum of 33 (thirty-three) students. 
C. If necessary, the class size maximum may be exceeded by two students. For the one or two 
students over the stated maximum, $80 per marking period shall be paid to the TEA 
scholarship fund TEA Education Fund  for graduating high school students from the Troy 
School District. 
35.6 Teaching Conditions. 
A. The total student contact time and preparation time shall be comparable to that of  high 
school teachers in the main contract. 
approval from the superintendent (or his/her designee) and the TEA. 
98  
234
B. Building Restructuring. If at least 75% of the Troy College and Career High  School 
teachers agree to a restructuring plan, the plan shall be implemented after receiving 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.31", Right: 
0.6", Widow/Orphan control
C. Vending machines shall be available. Formatted: Space After:  12 pt
99  
235
D. Troy College and Career High School staff may r equest additional office help at semester 
ends to aid teachers. Troy College and Career High School staff will arrange scheduling of 
this additional help as mutually agreed to by the principal, the staff of the building  and the 
Employee Services. 
G. Paved parking facilities shall be available for teachers’ use during school hours. 
Career High School. 
I. Teacher parking lot problems shall be reported to the administration for appropriate action. 
summer recess immediately preceding the start of the school year at his/her daily rate, unless 
notified to the contrary by the end of the preceding teacher work year. 
35.7 Report Cards. 
A. Report cards or final grades shall not be routinely required to be completed and handed in 
earlier than the end of the second work day following the last day of the term as shown on 
the calendar. It is recognized, however, that grades may be required for certain students earlier 
than the time lines above, and the teachers agree to cooperate and submit grades earlier under 
these special circumstances (examples of special circumstances include student moving, 
scholarship and admission to college). 
B. Teachers shall have the authority to grade students and recommend whether a student shall 
be passed or retained. Any person or committee who has authority to change or reverse a 
teacher's decision shall do so only after furnishing the teacher with written notification of 
their action. The notification shall include the name of the student and rationale for said 
change. 
C. Progress reports for students achieving less than an average or satisfactory grade are routinely 
required at the end of the middle week of every term unless otherwise agreed to by the parties  
100  
236
E. Adequate lunchroom/lounge facilities will be available for staff use. There shall be  lavatory 
facilities available and reserved for adult staff use. 
F. Telephone facilities shall be provided for teachers' use for school business and  reasonable  
personal calls. 
H. Library Use. Article 14, Section 12 of the main contract shall not apply for Troy College and 
J. The counselor shall work up to two weeks (as determined by the administration) of the 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.26", Right: 
0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.26", Right: 
0.23"
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Normal,  No bullets or numbering
date on the Troy Education Association’s seniority list. 
101  
237
C. . 
35.8 Seniority. Article 17, Section 1 of the main contract shall apply in addition to the following: 
Troy College and Career High School teachers employed as of the effective date of this agreement will 
be given their actual date of hire as a teacher for Troy College and Career High School as a seniority 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Normal, Right:  0.22", Tab stops:  0.74", Left
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", Right:  0.22", Space
After:  12 pt, Widow/Orphan control
as years of service to Troy College and Career High School (alternat ive education) or the K -12 
program, or a combination of the two. 
35.10 District Organization. The terms and conditions outlined in Article 32 of the main collective 
bargaining agreement shall in no way apply to staff at Troy College and Career High School. 
35.11 Troy College and Career Head Teacher. 
A. Qualification for Head Teacher.  An applicant for the head teacher position must have a 
secondary permanent, provisional, or professional certificate with at least three (3) years 
teaching experience at the secondary level. 
B. The position of head teacher shall be reopened every two years. All applicants will be 
interviewed by the building supervisor. Following these interviews, the building  supervisor 
will appoint a head teacher whom he/she feels best meets the needs of the building. 
C. Suggested Duties: 
1. The head teacher shall be in charge of the building during the absence of the 
supervisor. 
2. The head teacher shall make decisions within the scope of the normal procedures 
and policies set for the building by the supervisor and Central Office. 
3. The head teacher’s workday shall begin thirty (30) minutes before the entry of the 
students and end thirty (30) minutes after the close of school. 
4. The head teacher shall assist the supervisor with the discipline problems of the 
building. He/she shall handle minor discipline problems within the building and all 
discipline problems when the supervisor is unavailable. 
5. The head teacher shall have the responsibility  of seeing that all accident forms are 
properly filled out in the absence of the supervisor. 
6. The head teacher shall acquaint himself/herself with the coordination of all services 
to the school. 
7. The head teacher shall be provided an opportunity to gain administrative experience 
in the following areas: (a) pupil records; (b) requisitions; (c) referrals; (d) proposals to 
Central Office; and (e) conduct some faculty meetings. 
8. Shall serve as a liaison between the individuals of the staff and the administration 
when necessary. 
under the direction of the head teacher. 
*Some language formerly within Article 35 is now stated within Appendix III. 
102  
238
35.9 Retirement. All terms and conditions in Article 29 of the main collective bargaining agreement 
shall apply, except that “years of service as a teacher with the Troy School District" shall be defined 
9. Since all of these listed duties cannot be handled at the same time by any one head 
teacher, it is the responsibility of the building supervisor to decide what duties shall be 
ARTICLE 36: TROY EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATORS 
Formatted: Left:  0.65", Right:  0.75", Top:  0.61",
Bottom:  0.65", Footer distance from edge:  0.49"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.11", First line:  0", Right: 
0.22", Widow/Orphan control
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Collective Bargaining Agreement Application. 
their entirety to the Troy early childhood educators: 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Article 1- Recognition (Insertion of term “Early Childhood Educators” to Article 1.2) 
Article 2- TEA Rights 
Article 3- Teacher Rights 
Article 7- Rights of Administration 
Article 8- Joint Responsibilities  
Article 9- Health and Safety 
Article 15- Special Populations 
Article 18- Leave Pay 
Article 19- Maternity, Child Care, and Adoption Leaves 
Article 20- Leaves of Absence- General 
Article 21- Sabbatical Leave 
Article 22- Lines of Communication 
Article 23- Grievance Procedure  
Article 24- Negotiations Procedures (Excluding Article 24.4) 
Article 25- Miscellaneous Provisions (Excluding Articles 25.10-25.15) 
Article 28- Protection of Teachers 
Article 29- Severance Pay and Retirement/Resignation 
Article 30- Master Sick Bank 
Article 31- Annexation and Consolidation 
Article 33- Retirement 
Article 39- Duration of Agreement  
educators whose employment is not governed by the Michigan Teachers’ Tenu re Act.  By way of 
illustration, the early childhood educators are defined as working within the Board’s tuition -based 
preschool program that is governed under Michigan’s Licensing and Regulatory Affairs (“LARA”) 
Division.   
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
36.1  Evaluation. 
See Appendix 4 for evaluation tool of early childhood educators.   
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
36.2  Seniority. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
classification minus time spent on unpaid leave of absence, except for health and milit ary leaves.  
Seniority is lost when employment as an early childhood educator is terminated.  Date of hire is defined 
by the first day of work.  In case of equal seniority, early childhood educator seniority placement shall 
be determined by a one-time drawing among early childhood educators tied with each other.  The time 
and place of drawing shall be determined by the Association and Board and announced to all early 
childhood educators.  Seniority as an early childhood educator does transfer to other barga ining unit 
positions (i.e. a K-12 certificated teaching assignment). 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
36.3  Layoff and Recall. 
103  
239
The following articles and schedules contained in this collective bargaining agreement shall apply in 
The following provisions below are in effect and exclusively applicable to the early childhood 
Seniority Definition .  Seniority is based on date of hire in the early childhood educator job 
Layoff and Recall by Seniority .  A reduction of the number of early childhood educator positions is 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
within the sole discretion of the Board. In the event of a reduction of positions, the least senior early 
childhood educators will be laid off to accommodate the number of positions elim inated. The Board 
shall send written layoff notices to the early childhood educators that will be laid off at least four (4)  
weeks prior to the effective date of the layoff.   Laid -off early childhood educators shall retain recall 
rights for two (2) years or the length of their seniority at the time of layoff, whichever is less. The order 
of recall shall be most senior recalled first.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Unemployment Setoff. An early childhood educator who is laid off and who is paid unemployment 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
compensation benefits assoc iated with his/her regular assignment during the summer immediately 
following the layoff, and who is subsequently recalled to a bargaining unit position by September 
fifteenth (15th) of the following school year, will be paid his/her regular wage less the amount of 
unemployment compensation. The total of unemployment compensation plus salary earned by 
employment in the District shall not be below that which the early childhood educator would have 
received had she/he been employed the entire school year. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
36.4  Early Childhood Educator Responsibilities. 
to honor Board policies and administration regulations not in conflict with this Agreement.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
General R esponsibilities.  It is the responsibility of the TEA and each individual early childhood 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
educator, as well as the Board, to provide the highest quality education program possible for every 
student in the School District.  On the early childhood educator's part, this includes:  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
A. Careful daily preparation of lessons and activities. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.38", Hanging:  0.5", Right: 
0.23"
B. An early childhood educator may be required to serve on no more than two committees 
during the school year.  Early childhood educators may be requested to serve on district -
wide, inter- and intra-school committees.  This section is not intended to limit an early 
childhood educator from voluntarily serving on any number of committees.  
C. A written notice will be provided of not more than five (5) annual evening events not to 
exceed six hours cumulatively that each early childhood educator is expected to attend.  
Each early childhood educator will be given a written notice of the required event(s)by 
September 1 st of each school year.  Parent -early childhood educator conferences are set 
forth in the school calendar and not included in the mentioned events.  
D. Promptness in meeting classes, keeping appointments with parents, students and other 
school employees, and in furnishing essential reports and information required by 
administrators.   
E. It is the responsibility of the early childhood educator to assist th e administration in 
maintaining discipline and proper student behavior, according to the rules of LARA (R 
400.8140), 
F. Early childhood educators shall make an effort to be aware and report the general health 
and wellbeing of students as it relates to evide nce of child abuse, nutrition and general 
childhood illnesses.    
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Early Childhood Parent-Teacher Conference Schedule.   Early childhood educators will attend two 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
104  
240
Policies and Regulations.  It is the responsibility of the TEA and individual early childhood educators 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Fall evening conferences and two Spring evening conferences not to exceed a total of fourtee n (14) 
hours in a given school year.  The Board will publish the evening schedule by September 1 st of each 
school year. The evening conferences will be scheduled as follows: 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Evening Session  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Absence.   When an early childhood educator is unable to be in school on any given day, he/she should 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
contact the designated absence system at least one and one-half (1 1/2) hours prior to the student starting 
time, in order that arrangements may be made for a substitute.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
A. An early childhood educator shall not be charged a leave day on a day when schools are 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.38", Hanging:  0.5",
closed, as per Section 9.1, unless the absence was arranged for prior to the closing of school 
Right:  0.23"
and is a day in a series of absences.  
B. Each early childhood edu cator shall be provided at the beginning of the school year, the 
number that should be called when a substitute is needed.  
C. Early childhood educators will provide lesson plans to be used in the event of their absence 
and shall follow the call-in procedures as outlined in Article 6, Section 6.3.  
D. When an early childhood educator calls in late, the Assistant Superintendent, Employee 
Services will contact the early childhood educator to determine whether an emergency 
situation existed.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Unauthorized Absence.  An absence without prior notification from the early childhood educator to 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
the administration or substitute caller shall be considered unauthorized.  Absences from parent -early 
childhood educator conferences because of college -level classes shall be authorized if the early 
childhood educator notifies the building administrator at least three weeks prior to parent -early 
childhood educator conferences.  Early childhood educators who are absent from parent -early 
childhood educator conferences shall make up the conference outside of regular teaching duties.  
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
36.5  Professional Qualifications & Class Size. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
All early childhood educators employed by the Board shall meet the LARA “Licensing Rules for Child 
Care Centers,” as promulgated or amended by LARA.  C lass size maximum shall not exceed those 
published by LARA in the “Licensing Rules for Child Care Centers.”  
105  
241
Early Start 
Late Start 
4:30 p.m. – 8:00 p.m. 
5:00 p.m. - 8:30 p.m. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
after due consideration of all relevant factors.  These times shall be determined by August first of each 
year, and the TEA shall be so notified. Early childhood educators wil l be required to be at their 
designated workstations at least five (5) minutes before the designated student starting time of the full 
day or half day program.   
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Work Day. The total length of an early childhood educator's workday shall not exceed eight (8) hours 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
per day.  The workday shall be continuous except as provided for elsewhere in this Agreement.  The 
District agrees that no District or building level meetings will be scheduled the last three hours of the 
first workday.  Early childhood educators involved in scheduled TEA meetings shall be excused at the 
end of the pupils' school day, except that this practice shall not apply to more than five (5) days when 
the entire TEA membership is involved.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Professional Responsibilities.  Preparation for classroom teaching, building meetings, IEP meetings, 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
SAT meetings, parent meetings, collaboration meetings, assigned non -teaching duties, extracurricular 
activities which are not covered by extra compensation, curriculum and other required professional 
committee meetings, exclusive of TEA meetings, are recognized as examples of professional 
responsibilities falling within the work week and/or day. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Preparation Time. The Board agrees to provide a weekly minimum of three hundred (300) minutes 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
of preparation and conference time for all early childhood educators.  Planning time for early childhood 
educators will be schedule for thirty (30) minutes prior and thirty (30) minutes after the student day.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Staff Member Death.   Whenever a staff member dies, the District shall provide substitutes for up to 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
80% of the early childhood educators requiring substitutes in the affected building to permit those 
individuals to attend the funeral.   
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Lunch Period All elementary early childhood educators shall be guaranteed a duty-free, uninterrupted 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
lunch period of thirty (30) minutes per day.  Early childhood educators are not required to stay in the 
building during their lunch period.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Recess Procedure.   The standard procedure shall be in compliance with curr ent state law licensing 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
and regulations (LARA).  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Early Release Days . It is recognized by the Board and the TEA that reasonable grade level, 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
departmental, school improvement and general faculty meetings are a necessary and integral part of the 
professional duties of early childhood educators.  The early childhood program will utilize the early 
release days in the current school calendar for the purposes of staff meetings.  Up to a maximum of one 
hour per early release day may be used for such meetings.   
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Building events.  All early childhood educators shall be informed no later than Thursday of the week 
preceding the event of temporary workday schedule changes which result from special activities such 
as assemblies or other building -wide events.  In the event a scheduled special activity is canceled or 
rescheduled, all staff shall be notified immediately.   
106  
242
36.6  Teaching Hours. 
Teaching Hours.   Starting and closing times of individual schools will be determined by the Board 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
36.7  Teaching Conditions. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
A. Adequate lunchroom, restroom and lavatory facilities will be reserved exclusively for staff 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.38", Hanging:  0.5",
use.  At least one room, appropriately furnished, shall be reserved as a staff lounge. In 
Right:  0.23"
schools where beverages are not otherwise or already available, vending machines shall be 
installed at the request of the TEA, the proceeds to be used at the discretion of the building 
faculty. 
B. Adequate rooms for use by special subjects' early childhood educators, diagnosticians, 
psychologists, social workers, etc.   
C. Telephone facilities shall be provided for early childhood educators' use for school business 
and reasonable personal calls.  The location is to be determined by the administrator and 
staff. 
D. Paved parking facilities reserved for early childhood educators' use during school hours.  
E. Two (2) classes will not be scheduled to meet in the same classroom at the same time 
except where rooms are physically designed for this purpose, the early childhood educators 
arrange joint sessions, or to accommodate emergency situations that do not extend beyond 
the close of the school day.  
F. Early childhood educators will be provided reasonable access t o duplicators and 
photocopiers for instructional purposes subject to machine capacity and other building 
requirements.  
G. Recording of sound and/or images of TEA members performing regular daily duties during 
the eight (8) hour early childhood educators’ wo rkday will not be broadcast on cable 
television unless the TEA member signs the cable release form.  
H. In the event that a student has an incident that requires toileting assistance, the student will 
be encouraged to manage his/her needs independently. If the student is unable to complete 
the toileting task on his/her own, staff members will work cooperatively to ensure that the 
student’s needs are addressed (i.e. If one staff member is either coaching or physically 
assisting a child with toileting, a second  staff member will be within close proximity to 
ensure that no staff member is assisting toileting in isolation). In extreme cases where 
toileting assistance is not manageable in the classroom, the toileting assistance will be 
managed in the clinic and the parent may be contacted. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Teaching Supplies. The Board shall provide equipment and supplies for every class so as to maintain 
a high level of instruction for the children of Troy.    
107  
243
Teaching Conditions.  The Board recognizes its duty to keep the schools properly equipped and 
maintained, including:  
In-service Training.  Five (5) half days per year may be allowed for in -service training, workshops, 
curriculum studies, etc., not including special days as listed in the calendar.  The District shall make 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23",
Widow/Orphan control
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23",
Widow/Orphan control
in-service training on special education issues available to early child hood educators prior to the 
beginning of the school year.   
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Report Cards.   Any new evaluation tool, such as report cards, shall be reviewed by a committee at 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
that level.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Education of Students. The parties seek to educate young people in the democratic tradition; to foster 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
their recognition of both individual freedom and social responsibility; to inspire meaningful awareness 
of and respect for the Constitution and the Bill of Rights; and to instill appreciation of the values of 
individual personality. Early childhood educators have an obligation to present facts without bias, and 
to encourage students to think and to draw objective conclusions.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Responsible teaching shall be encouraged for all early childhood educators who shall exercise such 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23",
responsibility within the framework of the curriculum, school policies, good judgment and common 
Widow/Orphan control
standards of decency which shall prevail at all times.  Within these guidelines, the early childhood 
educator is encouraged to teach the student in the best manner of which he/she is capable.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Access to Materials.  All early childhood educators and the TEA Office shall have electronic access 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
to their building's handbook(s) and work rules.  Also, the District Board Policy book will be available 
on the District’s website.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Field Trips.  The Board agrees to permit early childhood educators to conduct approved educational 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
field trips and, when necessary, to provide substitute early childhood educators at Board expense.  The 
Administration shall provide the bus driver with a map to the destination.  At the time of approval, the 
Transportation Department shall furnish the requesting early childhood educator with a statement of 
total costs, including complete mileage costs, bus driver's meal (if appropriate) and any other added 
costs.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Conferences.  Early childhood educators attending approved professional conferences shall be released 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
from teaching duties without loss of leave days or compensation.  The expenses for such conferences 
shall be assumed by the Board.  Every effort shall be made to equitably distribute approved conferences 
according to the following levels: Pre-K, K-2, 3-5, 6-8, 9-12, and Special Education.   The Board will 
reimburse an early childhood educator for the appropriate expenses incurred while attending a Board 
approved conference upon submission of an itemized expense sheet.  Travel, meals, lodging, and 
registration fees shall be deemed appropriate expenses of the Board, as well as the cost of the substitute 
teacher needed to relieve the participant.  An early childhood educator attending such conferences and 
meetings shall be granted sufficient leave time to attend without loss of compensation.  Early childhood 
educators will submit, upon request, a written report regarding such conferences.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
36.8  Probationary Period and Employment Protection. 
four (24) months.  Any probationer’s leave of absence extends the probationary period.  During the 
probationary period, the pro bationer is considered at -will and the Board shall have the sole right to 
discharge and issue disciplinary action. The grievance procedure shall not apply to disciplinary action 
against probationary early childhood educators.   
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Reduction in Rank.  Upon completion of the probationary period, no early childhood educator shall 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
be disciplined, reprimanded, or reduced in compensation without just cause.  Any such Board action 
may be subject to the grievance procedure.  
108  
244
Probationary Period.  All early childhood educators shall be subject to probationary period of twenty-
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
36.9  Leaves of Absence. 
Agreement, will require a vacancy to exist for the early childhood educator to return from leave.  In the 
event that there is not a vacancy in a given school year, the ear ly childhood educator shall be deemed 
to be on a voluntary layoff.  Early childhood educators on a voluntary layoff under this Article shall 
retain recall rights for two years.   During the voluntary layoff, early childhood educators may apply 
for any internal job posting that the early childhood educator is qualified to teach.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
36.10  Mentoring. 
to acceptance on a voluntary basis. Each mentor shall be paid five hundred dollars ($500) per mentee. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Mentoring Scope.  All applications for exception are to be forwarded to the Assistant Superintendent 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
of Employee Services. If mentors are approved to work with more than one (1) teacher, meetings may 
not be concurrent, and mentors shall not be assigned more than two (2) mentees. The mentor receives 
the contractual stipend for each mentee.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
A. The mentor assignment is typically for one (1) year.  
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
bullets or numbering
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
D. The only time mentors can count towards the minimum fifteen (15) hours is time outside 
Formatted: Normal, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
free lunch.)  
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Justified, Right:  0.23"
F. Mentors and mentees will be surveyed at the end of the year based on mentorin g duties 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
defined below.  
Formatted: Normal, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
numbering
G. Mentors will work with mentees in a variety of ways on a variety of issues. The goal is to 
3. Meeting standards;  
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
4. Interpreting COR or other student growth/proficiency data;  
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
5. Classroom assignment;  
109  
245
Any leave of ab sence greater than one year in duration granted under Articles 20 & 21 of the Master 
Mentoring Stipend. The Board retains the discretion to assign mentors which assignments are subject 
B. Mentors and mentees shall keep a log of their activities per District protocol.   
C. Mentors must provide mentees with at least fifteen (15) hours of mentor time.  
of the mentor’s regularly scheduled work time. (E.g. Mentoring may occur on their duty -
E. The log should be completed on or before June 1 st and forwarded to the Assistant 
Superintendent, Secondary Instruction or Assistant Superintendent, Elementary Instruction 
at Central Office. The log will be used to validate mentor session time.  
help the mentee improve his or her craft and attain/maintain effective performance. Issues 
that mentors and mentees might address include any of the following:  
1. Daily routines in school;  
2. Preparing lessons using District approved curriculum;  
6. Preparing substitute teacher folders;  
7. Procedures for field trips;  
8. Building protocols and procedures;  
9. Where to access technology help;  
10. How to access e-mail and voice mail messages;  
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.88", Right:  0.23",  No
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
numbering
Formatted: Normal, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
numbering
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Normal, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
numbering
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Normal, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
numbering
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.38", Hanging:  0.5",
Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.13", Right:  0.23"
11. Parent meetings;  
12. Classroom management;  
13. Student records;  
14. Where to find recourses for the classroom;  
15. IEP issues; 
16. School committees; and/or 
17. How to get involved in extra-curricular events.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Mentors and mentees should find ways of touching base on regular occasions. Mentors should be able 
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
to serve as a guide to help the mentee manage curriculum, classroom management, and 
building/student/parent issues. Mentor Expectations include: 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Availability  The mentor is always available to the mentee. The mentor frequently 
Formatted Table
initiates contact with the mentee. Regular mentor sessions are planned.  
making suggestions. Occasionally, the mentor includes reference to 
how he or she would handle the situation.  
the mentee to look at his or her teaching practices with an eye for 
improvement. The mentor models *The Learning Cycle.  
between mentoring and evaluation. Topics and discussion from 
mentoring sessions are not shared with other staff or administration. 
Classroom observation notes made by the mentor become the sole 
property of the mentee following reflective conferences.  
occasions. The mentor provides positive peer coaching feedback that is 
specific and evidence based in a timely manner. The feedback is 
designed to increase the mentee’s teaching skills by reinforcing “Best 
Practices” that are observed. Feedback also includes reflective 
questions centered on areas for improvement.  
teaching skills and become actively involved with students, parents and 
staff. The mentor models a positive attitude toward the school, the 
District and the community at large. The encouragement to succeed is 
genuine.  
content can be put into practice in the classroom using effective 
pedagogy for all students.  
to enhance the mentoring experience.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
110  
246
Problem 
Solving  
The mentor frequently leads the mentee into discovering possible 
solutions to problems on his or her own through asking questions and 
Reflective 
Questions  
The mentor frequently takes the opportunity to ask reflective questions 
of the mentee. The mentor utilizes reflective questioning skills to invite 
Confidentiality  The mentor is sensitive to and closely adheres to the “Firewall” 
Feedback  The mentor engages in observing the mentee’s classroom on several 
Encouragement  The mentor encourages the mentee to try new things, expand his or her 
Knowledge of 
Content  
The mentor demonstrates an in depth understanding of content 
pedagogy and student standards. The mentor actively interprets how the 
Technology  The mentor frequently utilizes information-age learning and technology 
Managing 
Student 
Learning  
The mentor can effectively manage and monitor student learning for 
ALL students, can systematically organize lessons and frequently offers 
assistance.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.88", Right:  0.23",  No
B. Mentors and the mentees will create a schedule of formal mentoring sessions. At a 
bullets or numbering
minimum, monthly individual mentoring sessions should be scheduled. Time should be set 
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
aside for these more formal sessions. Formal mentoring time can be scheduled before or 
after school. Mentors and mentees can also decide to meet on the weekend or in the 
evening.  
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
C. Mentors can and should meet with the mentee on an informal basis to review lessons, talk 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", Right:  0.23", Add space
about problems that have just arisen, etc. These conversations will often  take place in the 
between paragraphs of the same style,  No bullets or
space between Latin and Asian text, Don't adjust space
mentee and building principal based upon the availability of guest teacher coverage or other 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.88", Right:  0.23", 
suitable coverage for the mentor’s classroom/assignment. Any additional release time for 
No bullets or numbering
the mentor and/or release time for the mentee is subject to approval by the building 
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
principal. 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
E. Mentors and mentees can earn up to fifteen (15) hours of professional development for the 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", Right:  0.23", Add space
mentoring activity.  
between paragraphs of the same style,  No bullets or
numbering, No widow/orphan control, Don't adjust
generic mentoring sessions is for seven and one -half (7 ½) hours of professional 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
development credit. Mentors and mentees shall regi ster for these generic sessions instead 
Formatted: Normal, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
of submitting special requests.   
numbering
Formatted: Normal, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.38", Hanging:  0.5",
Required Professional Development.  Early childhood educators with a teaching certificate shall be 
Right:  0.23"
required to complete a minimum of thirty (30) hours of professional development annually.  Early 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
childhood educators without a teaching certificate shall be required to complete a minimum of 
twenty-four (24) hours of professional development. It is understood and agreed that the minimal 
amount of required annual professional development shall be in accordance with applicable state law 
and regulations.  Professional development opportunities that satisfy this requirement include: 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.38", Right:  0.23",  No
B. Martin Luther King Day Professional Development Workshop(s) in the Troy School 
bullets or numbering
District. 
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Justified, Right:  0.23"
111  
247
Mentoring Sessions.  
A. Mentoring will occur in a variety of formal and informal settings.  
hall, at the copy machine, during lunch, etc.  
D. Upon request, mentors shall be provided with release time to conduct two (2) classroom 
observations of his/her mentee. This time shall be mutually scheduled by the mentor, 
F. Generic mentoring sessions shall be created for 1 st and 2 nd semester on the District’s 
professional development tracking system. These sessions shall appear on the professional 
development calendar on January 15 and May 15 of the given school year. Each of these 
G. Mentor payment will be validated based on the mentoring log that is submitted by the 
mentor on or before June 1st.  
36.11  Professional Development. 
A. Summer workshops provided by the Troy School District. 
C. Pre-approved out -of-district workshops paid for by the District (No additional 
compensation shall be paid if the workshop is on a non-workday).  
between Asian text and numbers
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
numbering, No widow/orphan control, Don't adjust
space between Latin and Asian text, Don't adjust space
between Asian text and numbers
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
numbering
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Justified, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
numbering
Formatted: Right:  0.23",  No bullets or numbering
D. Pre-approved out of district workshops paid for by the teacher (No additional compensation 
Formatted: Justified, Right:  0.23"
shall be paid if the workshop is on a non-workday).  
Formatted: Right:  0.23",  No bullets or numbering
E. School year in-services (no guarantees to be scheduled or to attend; no guaranteed 
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
number of substitute days).  
Formatted: Right:  0.23",  No bullets or numbering
F. No later than October 1, the District shall announce the professional development sessions 
known at that tim e which shall be offered to early childhood educators after school each 
marking period.  Each of these sessions shall be scheduled for at least a minimum of one 
(1) hour.  The District may choose to offer additional professional development 
opportunities for which early childhood educators may opt to attend.    
Formatted: Justified, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
will be posted for each semester prior to the beginning of the semester.  
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.38", Hanging:  0.5",
Right:  0.23"
Recordkeeping.    
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
A. The early childhood educator must keep a record of professional development and submit 
the record to the building administrator for a signature by the last workday of the school 
year.  The early childhood educator will be provided with a signed copy.   
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.88", Right:  0.23", 
school year and June 30th can be counted for either the current or successor school year.  
Formatted: Justified, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
childhood educators, the early childhood educators are to pre -register on the District’s 
professional development management system for the session prior to the day of  the 
scheduled professional development event.  
Formatted: Justified, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
development plans, registration, and validation will be maintained on the District’s 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.38", Hanging:  0.5",
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Validation Procedures.  
through the District’s professional development management system after they have attended the 
professional development session.   The survey will consist of the following response prompts:  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
A. The intended outcomes, as described for this offering, were accomplished.  
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.88", Right:  0.23", 
Formatted: Justified, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
enhance my learning of content and/or skills.  
Formatted: Justified, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
implement the new content and/or skills.  
Formatted: Justified, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
numbering
112  
248
G. All building meetings eligible for professional development which are known at that time 
B. Staff development in-service attended between the end of the early childhood educators’ 
C. After the District announces the professional development that shall be offered to early 
D. All records of professional development including session offerings, teacher professional 
professional development management system.  
In lieu of a sign-in validation for attendance, early childhood educators are to complete an online survey 
B. The offering was organized so I had time to reflect on what I learned.  
C. The presenters modeled e ffective questioning strategies and facilitation techniques to 
D. The offering was organized so I had time to collaborate with colleagues and plan how to 
No bullets or numbering
numbering
numbering
Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
No bullets or numbering
numbering
numbering
numbering
E. I feel confide nt in my ability to implement the new knowledge or skills gained in this 
offering in my current position.  
Formatted: Justified, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
position.   Response prompts #1 -#5 (a -e above) will have blanks for multiple choice 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.38", Hanging:  0.5",
applicable” response.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
All responses to the survey will be used to validate attendance only; any information gathered from the 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
surveys will be used only for informational purposes by the District.   The parties recognize the mutual 
benefits for the early chi ldhood educators and District from receiving survey feedback as soon as 
possible following any professional development session. Accordingly, all participants are encouraged 
to complete the survey process in a timely manner. Within each of the four (4) mar king periods, if the 
professional development session occurs before progress reports are due, early childhood educators 
have until the end of that marking period to complete the survey. If the professional development 
session occurs after a progress report ing date, early childhood educators have until the end of the 
following marking period to complete their surveys for validation of professional development 
attendance. Validations must be completed prior to the end of the school year.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
The parties also recognize the mutual benefits for the early childhood educators and District to provide 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
professional development which meets the Michigan Department of Education (MDE)/Department of 
Licensing and Regulatory Affairs (LARA) requirements for District -Provided P rofessional 
Developments (DPPD) that might be utilized for the purpose of teacher certificate renewal and/or 
LARA licensing requirements. While the ultimate determination of what professional development 
activities/sessions qualifies as DPPD is within the authority of MDE/LARA to decide, the District will 
take steps to identify the activities/sessions it believes should qualify for this purpose within the 
District’s professional development management system. Further, the parties recognize that voluntary 
response prompts will be provided (in addition to those identified in subsection 2 above) for early 
childhood educators to utilize within the validation process as a means of supporting that the identified 
activities/sessions should qualify as DPPD. Nonethel ess, despite the District’s efforts to support early 
childhood educators in their possible use of completed professional development activities/sessions as 
DPPD for teacher certificate renewal, and/or LARA licensing requirements, the parties again recognize 
this final determination is within the exclusive authority of MDE and LARA.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
36.12  Part-time Assignments. 
application to the Assistant Superintendent, E mployee Services on or before March 1 for the ensuing 
school year.  Early childhood educators requesting and being granted part -time assignments shall be 
notified at least thirty (30) calendar days before the assignment begins.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
No part-time assignments shall come into existence without approval of the Superintendent or his/her 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
designee.  Once approved by the Superintendent or his/her designee, a part -time assignment shall not 
terminate during the school year. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
A part-time assignment may be continued for an additional school year by agreement between the early 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23",
childhood educators involved and the superintendent or his/her designee.  The termination of part-time 
Widow/Orphan control
assignments by the Superintendent or his/her designee shall not be considered an involuntary transfer.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
113  
249
F. Three specific ways I might implement the new knowledge or skills gained in my current 
responses that reflect a degree of agreement with each statement including a “not 
Part-time Application. Early childhood educators may volunteer for part-time assignments by making 
numbering
Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
A. Life insurance as provided in this Article.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.88", Right:  0.23",  No
Article and found on the Employee Services Intranet and District Transparency Report.  
Formatted: Justified
The Board shall pay the same pro ration of the single subscriber premium paid for salary 
for these insurances as provided in this Article, and the early childhood educator shall pay 
the remaining portion of the premium.  
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
C. Worker’s Compensation as provided in this Article.  
Formatted: Normal, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
numbering
D. Long-term disability insurance as provided in this Article.  
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
prorated consistent with the early childhood educators’ part-time schedule.   
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.38", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.88", Right:  0.23"
Part-time early childhood educators will be required to attend staff meetings, if the staff meeting is 
up meeting.  If no make -up meeting is scheduled, the early childhood educator is responsible for 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
obtaining the faculty meeting information.  Part -time early childhood educators shall also attend all 
parent conferences, open houses and serve on committees as provided for full -time early childhood 
educators.  No extra compensation shall be paid for the fulfillment of these duties.   For purposes of 
this Article, an early childhood educator who has voluntarily becom e a less than full -time employee 
shall be considered part-time.   
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Seniority.  Each early childhood educator participating in part-time will receive full seniority credit.  
days.   Absences shall be deducted on a prorated basis.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
36.13  Insurance. 
152, as amended, and other applicable Public Acts) of the single subscriber medical insurance coverage 
selected by an eligible early childhood educator per the applicable terms of this Article.   The Board 
shall maintain compliance with the Publicly Funded Health Insurance Contribution Act PA 152 of 
2011) and early childhood educator payroll deductions are authorized as necessary for this purpose.  
During the term of this Agreement, the Board shall pay the annual maximum amount allowable by PA 
152 towards the total cost of the medical and prescription premiums for the plans offered (or the 
maximum contribution allowed by any contractual restrictions outlined in this agreement.  Two-person 
or full-family coverage may be obtained at the early childhood educator’s expense via payroll deduction 
114  
250
Proration of Fringe Insurance Benefits .  Part time early childhood educators will be eligible for 
prorated insurance benefits. Early childhood educators shall have the following fringe benefit options: 
B. Health/Dental/Vision: The mutually agreed upon health insurance plans referenced in this 
E. Fringe benefits delineated in this Article are subject to the terms and approval of the 
insurance carrier.  
Preparation/Planning Time. Part-time early childhood educators’ preparation/planning time will not 
exceed the preparation/planning time of a full -time early childhood educator. Planning time will be 
immediately preceding or following his/her schedule.  If the staff meeting does not immediately precede 
or follow the early childhood educator's schedule, the ea rly childhood educator shall attend the make -
Sick Leave Days. Early childhood educators in a part -time position shall receive prorated sick leave 
Health Insurance Eligibility for Early Childhood Educators. Based upon a medical insurance 
coverage plan year of January 1st –December 31st, the Board will pay the actual cost (as defined per PA 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23",
Widow/Orphan control
bullets or numbering
Formatted: Normal, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
numbering
Formatted: Normal, Right:  0.23",  No bullets or
numbering
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23",
Widow/Orphan control
as permitted by law.  The plan options available to early childhood educators are outlined in Appendix 
5. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Option In Lieu of Medical Insurance . For early childhood educators who are eligible to be enrolled 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
in medical insurance, but do not choose to enroll and who are not enrolled in another Board-sponsored 
medical insurance plan, the Board will provide an advance election cafeteria plan that provides three 
thousand dollars ($3,000). For part-time assignments, his benefit shall be prorated consistent with part-
time language in this Article.  
Life Insurance. The Board will pay the premium on a fifty thousand ($50,000) term  life insurance 
policy for early childhood educators.  
provides a Schedule of Benefits that is outlined in Appendix 5. The plan shall provide for an internal 
and external coordination of benefits.  
Long Term Disability Insurance. The Board agrees to pay the premium on a policy that will 
provide long-term disability income insurance after the first sixty (60) calendar days of any illness or 
disability. Such insurance shall pay up to two-thirds (2/3) of his/her regular salary, subject to a 
maximum benefit of three thousand dollars ($3,000) per month and reduced by any amounts paid or 
payable under Worker’s Compensation, Social Security or the Michigan Public School Employees 
Retirement System. The remuneration under this Article is as established under the carrier’s policy 
and is paid at the daily rate (seven days per week fifty-two weeks per year) or 1/365th of the annual 
salary of the early childhood educator. This remuneration is paid up to retirement, death or the ability 
to return to work, whichever occurs first. 
Insurance While Receiving Worker’s Compensation Insurance.  If an early childhood educator is 
injured on the job, the Board agrees to continue to pay the premium for the above insurances at no 
cost to the early childhood educator for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months from the date of 
injury. If the twelve months are not consecutive, then a total of twelve months of insurance shall be 
provided.  A month will be counted if the early childhood educator is off work and drawing worker’s 
compensation pay for more than fifteen (15) calendar days and receiving insurance.  
Insurance Limitations.  The nature, amount, extent, commencement, duration, and term of benefits 
and coverage, as specified for all insurances in this Article, shall be as provided in the insurance 
policies and rules and regulations of the insurance carriers.  The Board’s only obligation shall be to 
pay the required premiums for said insurances. Any claim settled between the early childhood 
educator and the insurance carrier shall not be subject to the grievance procedure of the collective 
bargaining agreement.   
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
36.14  Professional Compensation. 
educators’ compensation schedule as follows: 
3 $31,120 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
4 $32,676 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
5 $34,232 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
childhood educators’ compensation schedule above. Any early childhood educator who holds a 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23",
Widow/Orphan control
115  
251
Dental and Vision Insurances. The Board agrees to self-fund a dental plan and a vision plan that 
Salary Schedule.  The compensation of early childhood educators is set forth in the early childhood 
Step Salary 
1 $28,008 
2 $29,564 
As of July 1, 2019, all eligible early childhood educators shall move to the appropriate step on the early 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
masters’ degree or higher will be eligible for a stipend of one thousand dollars ($1,000 annually).  The 
salary schedule is effective from the date of this Article’s ratification through January 31, 2021. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23",
normal teaching hours and all other required duties as outlined in this Article.  For any additional work 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
or duties, the early childhood educator shall be entitled to an hourly rate of twenty -four dollars and 
twelve cents ( $30.00) per hour of additional compensation.  All requests and tasks for extra -duty 
compensation must be pre-authorized by the Director of Early Childhood Programs.  
be closed:  Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, New Year's Day, Good Friday and Memorial 
Day.  There shall be six (6) paid holidays:  Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, New Year's 
Day, Good Friday and Memorial Day.  
educators’ compensation, the calendar for 2019/2020, shall constitute one hundred and ninety -two 
(192) days inclusive of the six (6) paid holidays.  Consistent with other articles of this Agreement, early 
childhood educators shall not lose pay for Act of God days.  
year of electing to receive his/her salary in twenty -one (21) equal payments or twenty -six (26) equal 
payments according to the pay schedules in the early childhood educators’ Compensation Schedule. 
An early childhood educator who elects the twenty -six (26) pay option may elect at the beginning of 
the school year to have the final five (5) payments in one payment on the last day of school or every 
two (2) week payments.   In years where the calendar dictates 22 or 27 pays, the early childhood 
educators’ will choose between these two options as opposed to the 21 or 26 pays. 
shall be transmitted to the financial institution on the date of the paycheck from which the 
deduction/direct deposit was made.  All early childhood educators shall enroll in direct deposit to a 
financial institution in the United States.  
to the beginning of the school year.  Pay checks shall be issued every other Friday according to the 
biweekly schedule.  If a pay date falls on a contractual holiday, pay checks shall be issued one business 
day earlier.    
LARA Regulations Savings Clause.  If any provision of this Article  becomes in conflict or contrary 
to the “Licensing Rules for Child Care Centers” as published by LARA, the rules a promulgated by 
LARA shall supersede the provisions in this Article.   
116  
252
Extra-duty Compensation. The salary schedule is based upon a normal weekly teaching load during 
Holidays and Paid Vacations.   The following legal holidays shall be observed, and all schools shall 
School Calendar.  The school calendars are set forth in this Agreement.  For purposes of early 
Pay Periods.   The early childhood educator shall be given the option at the beginning of each school 
Retroactive Pay.   All retroactive pay shall be paid on the next regular payday. 
Financial Institution Deductions/Direct Deposits.  Financial institution deductions/direct deposits 
Paycheck Payments.   The Board agrees to provide a biweekly schedule of payment to the TEA prior 
Widow/Orphan control
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06", Right:  0.23"
A Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06"
117  
253
ARTICLE 3637 
A. When known, the Board shall publish and post in each school a list of all positions which 
will be filled, and paid for at the scheduled rates, for the school year. If during the year they 
plan to fill any additional positions, the TEA will be notified, and the notification placed also 
in each school. No employee of the District will be asked to volunteer for any position not 
included in Schedules B, C or D. All new or recently vacated schedule C clubs shall be posted. 
B. Contracts shall be issued for extra -curricular sponsorships prior to the start of the 
season/activity. A teacher who takes an extra duty position and wishes to resign shall give at 
least two (2) weeks' written notice to his/her principal. Salary for the position will be prorated. 
C. If during the year a teacher wishes to organize and/or sponsor a club or activity not previously 
listed on Schedules B, C or D, the teacher must obtain administrativ e approval in writing by 
the Administration, and such administrator shall be responsible for the proper management 
process for achieving club or activity status. The placement of the club or activity on the 
appropriate schedule shall cause the Board and TE A to negotiate a rate of compensation 
within thirty (30) days after approval by the Administration. 
C and D are to be evaluated, it shall be done with the full knowled ge of the person being evaluated by 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", First line:  0", Outline
his/her administrative supervisor. If the Board makes any changes in the current instruments or adds 
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
ARTICLE 378 
THIS ARTICLE ONLY APPLIES TO ANCILLARY TEACHERS WHO ARE NOT  
COVERED BY THE MICHIGAN TEACHERS’ TENURE ACT. 
RECOGNITION, REDUCTION IN RANK, REPRIMANDS, WARNINGS, OR  DISCIPLINE, 
EVALUATION, LAYOFF/RECALL, TRANSFERS AND LEAVES  : FOR TEACHERS NOT 
COVERED BY THE TEACHER TENURE ACT 
38.1 Recognition. The following provisions are in effect and exclusively applicable, where relevant, 
to ancillary teachers, defined within the parties’ Collective Bargaini ng Agreement as teachers whose 
employment is not governed by the Michigan Teachers’ Tenure Act. By way of illustration,  this 
includes TSD employees whose position does not require a teaching certificate, who maintain licensing 
necessary for their positions , and who are regularly employed as guidance counselors, school 
psychologists, speech pathologists, consultants, administrative interns and social workers. As used 
within this Article only, the term “teacher” means and includes only “ancillary teachers.” 
118  
254
37.1 Schedules B, C and D. 
37.137.2 Evaluation of Schedules B, C and D Positions. If positions as set forth in Schedules B, 
new instruments, the TEA shall be so notified before the instrument becomes operational. The TEA 
shall be provided a copy of all current evaluation instruments. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11"
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Start at: 2 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.39" +
Indent at:  -0.1"
Bottom:  0.65"
in rank or compensation without just cause. Any such action shall be subject to the grievance 
numbering
the arbitrator is limited to whether or not the termination was done in an arbitrary and/or capricious 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
manner. 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt, Bold
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 3 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.26" +
A. Any oral reprimanding, warning or disciplining of an ancillary teacher by a principal or 
Indent at:  0.03"
other administrator shall be done in private, not in front of students, parents or other school 
employees, and it shall be done only for just cause. 
B. If a written record of an incident is inserted in a personnel file, the teacher shall receive a 
dated copy within ten (10) days of the administrator's knowledge of said incident. The 
teacher's copy will note that the item is being inserted into said file. Only those items so 
processed may be used in disciplinary actions against the teacher. 
The teacher shall have the right within thirty (30) workdays after receipt to insert a rebuttal 
to any item. Any rebuttal so inserted shall be attached to the object insertion by the person 
responsible for said file. 
C. Only the teacher's immediate supervisors or a central office administrator may reprimand, 
warn or discipline a teacher or have said reprimand, warning, or discipline enclosed in 
personnel files. 
D. Written record of an incident and rebuttal involving a teacher will be removed from the 
teacher's personnel file when he/she leaves the District for any reaso n except a leave of 
absence. 
E. All significant complaints and compliments, whether or not they seem valid, received  by 
the Administration, shall be reported to the teacher named within one (1) week. 
If a complaint is filed against a named teacher by a student, the Association president or a 
mutually agreed upon designee shall have an opportunity to be present at an interview with 
the student with the school principal or other school official. However, the school board 
will not be required to afford the named teacher this opportunity if it determines within one 
(1) week that the student's complaint is not a justified basis for any personnel action against 
the teacher. 
This section shall not prevent the school board from conducting such investigations as it 
deems necessary with respect to other complaints or allegations of misconduct by a teacher. 
F. If the Board plans to read a letter at a board meeting, the teacher, who is the object of the 
letter, will be contacted prior to its public reading. The Board will make every effort to 
119  
255
38.1 38.2 Reduction in Rank. No ancillary teacher shall be disciplined, reprimanded, or reduced 
procedure. In the event any probationary ancillary teacher is terminated and proceeds to arbitration, 
38.138.3 Reprimands, Warnings, or Discipline. 
Formatted: Normal, Indent: Left:  0.06",  No bullets or
Formatted: Left:  0.65", Right:  0.75", Top:  0.61",
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", First line:  0", Outline
protect teachers from unsubstantiated public criticism. 
120  
256
G. Under no circumstances shall a student's CA60 or confidential special education file 
contain any reference to a teacher's conduct or any information which may be construed as 
evaluating the teacher. 
H. Termination Notice. A probationary ancillary teacher or the Board of Education must give 
a sixty- (60) day written notice before termination of contract unless mutually agreed upon. 
If the contract is broken by the probationer without proper written notification, the Board 
of Education may take proper action. 
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
0.72"
October 1. Other evaluators and obse rvers shall be identified prior to their observation. In  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
absence of a written evaluation during a school year, the teacher's performance is assumed to 
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Indent at:  -0.03"
the exclusive right to designate the administrator(s) who will conduct such observation(s). 
Further, any such requests must be made by the teacher in writing to the Superintendent or 
designee to the start of the subsequent school year. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
be given to the teacher. The Superintendent's copy will not be transmitted by the evaluator until 
Indent at:  -0.03"
after the evaluation conference, at which time the teacher receives the written evaluation. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
Indent at:  -0.03"
D. If the principal suspects or has reason to believe that there will be a marked adverse change 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
from the previous evaluation of the teacher, this fact is to be brought to the teacher's attention 
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
given, recommendations to improve shall be listed on  the  evaluation, with  sources  of 
Indent at:  -0.03"
assistance included. When a teacher’s overall performance rating is “minimally effective or 
ineffective” in three (3) or more domains of the evaluation, an Individual Development Plan 
(IDP) shall be developed by the evaluator in consultation with the teacher. 
121  
257
38.138.4 Evaluation Procedure. 
A. All ancillary teachers not covered by the teacher tenure act shall be evaluated at least once 
every school year. Primary evaluators shall be identified to the ancillar y teaching staff by 
be acceptable. 
An ancillary teacher whose overall performance rating is “minimally effective” or 
“ineffective” may request to be observed by another administrator during the course of his/her 
next evaluation. However, upon such request, the District within its sole discretion shall have 
B. The evaluations are to be in written form and signed by the evaluator and teacher. For the 
purpose of this provision, electronic forms and signatures shall be acceptable. One copy is to 
C. All teachers shall be given a copy of the Troy Educator Appraisal Model (TEAM) upon 
request. Additionally, all new teachers will be provided with a copy of the TEAM. 
in writing in order that the teacher will have reasonable time within which to attempt to 
correct the situation. 
E. Written explanation shall be given for a rating of “minimally effective or ineffective” in any  
domain of the evaluation. When domain ratings less than "effective or highly effective” are 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", First line:  0", Outline
Start at: 3 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.26" +
Indent at:  0.03", Tab stops:  0.5", Left + Not at  0.72" + 
Formatted: Font: 11 pt, Not Expanded by / Condensed
by 
Formatted: Font: 11 pt
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
Indent at:  -0.03"
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
“minimally effective or ineffective” or a teacher’s performance has been rated as “minimally 
Indent at:  -0.03"
effective or ineffective” in three or more domains of the evaluation. Completion of 
recommended courses of action shall demonstrate intent to improve but may not be construed 
to mean that the teacher has successfully remedied the unacceptable performance. Teachers 
placed on an IDP shall meet with the administrator writing the plan before said plan is  
implemented. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
and have an additional formal observation. 
Indent at:  -0.03"
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
formal classroom observation, but need not be notified of other observations. 
Indent at:  -0.03"
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.79" +
written evaluation. There should be a reas onable interval of time between 
Indent at:  -0.29"
observations for a written evaluation. Following observations teachers will be 
provided feedback including items that the evaluator(s) believe require alteration or 
improvement within ten (10) working days of the classroom observation. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.79" +
the teacher's personnel file housing the object evaluation. 
Indent at:  -0.29"
23. It is agreed that no observation shall be recorded by any electronic device without 
the knowledge and agreement of the teacher. 
4. All formal observations of the teacher's performance shall be conducted openly and 
with the full knowledge of the teacher. 
5. Formal evaluation of a teacher's performance shall not take place the first week of 
the school year at elementary, the first week of each semester at secondary, on a 
half-day, during parent -teacher conference days, on the day before or following a 
holiday or recess period. 
6. All written evaluations will be completed and submitted to the teacher at (or before) 
the end of the year evaluation conference which shall be held no later than ten (10) 
calendar days prior to the last day of the school year for teachers. 
122  
258
F. An Individual Development Plan is a document recommending courses of action to be taken 
when an evaluator determines it necessary or when a teacher’s overall performance rating is 
G. Formal observations of a teacher's work in the classroom shall take place for a minimum  of 
twenty-five (25) minutes during a regularly scheduled class period. The teacher may request 
H. Procedures: The individual teacher shall be notified not less than the day preceding the first 
formal classroom observation nor longer than ten (10) working days in advance of the first 
1. In all cases, formal classroom observations for a particular written evaluation shall 
be performed by the evaluator(s) who will also be the person(s) producing the 
2. A teacher may submit a rebuttal if he/she does not agree with the written evaluation. 
The rebuttal is to be attached to all object evaluations by the person responsible for 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.13", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 4 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.13", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 4 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
7. If an administrator is going to recommend that a teacher be terminated, the teacher 
shall receive his/her final evaluation at least ten (10) working days before the 
recommendation is made to the Board. 
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 3 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.26" +
A. Layoff means removal from the payroll with no employment rights other than retention  of 
Indent at:  0.03"
seniority status, extra -duty status, recall rights as noted below, and such other rights as 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
provided. 
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
layoff procedures shall prevail. The order of reduction of staff will be as follows: 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
Indent at:  -0.03"
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.79" +
be allowed to take a voluntary layoff unless a qualified replacement for his/her 
Indent at:  -0.29"
position is available. The term "qualified" means that the ancillary teacher must be 
qualified for the position as defined in 36.8. 
2. If the required number of layoffs cannot be effectuated through the voluntary 
procedure, involuntary layoffs will be effectuated in the following order: 
a. Ancillary teachers in order of seniority (least senior first), however, the Board 
will retain less senior teachers when no more senior teachers are available or 
qualified for the position. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
Indent at:  -0.03"
D. Requests for voluntary layoffs shall be sent to the Superintendent or designee no later than 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
April fifteenth. 
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
voluntary layoff will be provided. If the request for a voluntary layoff is denied, the teacher 
who made a timely and proper application for a voluntary layoff shall be allowed to apply for 
any unpaid leave by July fifteenth, for which he/she would otherwise be eligible. In this case, 
the July fifteenth application shall be considered timely, and the controlling sections of 
Articles 19 and 20 shall determine if the leave is granted. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
F. Subject to the provisions of this article, teachers with the most seniority will be retained to 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
recalled at any time. 
Indent at:  -0.03"
123  
259
38.138.5 Layoffs of Ancillary Teachers shall be governed by provisions A. through K. 
B. If, because of unforeseen circumstances, such as reduction in student population, changes in 
curriculum or deficit financial conditions, it becomes necessary to reduce staff, the following 
1. Ancillary teachers in order of seniority (starting with the most senior) will be given 
the opportunity to take a voluntary layoff; provided, however, that no teacher will 
C. Notice of potential availability of voluntary layoffs shall be sent to all teachers not later than 
March fifteenth. 
E. A teacher requesting a voluntary layoff shall be notified no later than June 25th if the 
the last. 
G. The voluntary layoff will be for at least one school year. Thereafter, the teacher may be 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", Hanging:  0.42", Outline
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.13", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 4 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Indent at:  -0.03"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Indent at:  -0.03"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Indent at:  -0.03"
While on voluntary layoff the teacher may return to active employment in any position (to be 
selected by the Board) for which he/she is certified and qualified and which is held by a less 
senior teacher; provided, however, that such return must occur at the beginning of the school 
year unless the Board agrees otherwise, and the teacher must give the Board written notice 
of his/her intent to return by the preceding March 1. 
Should a voluntarily laid-off teacher refuse to return after recall, he/she shall be placed at the 
bottom of the recall list and, thereafter, be treated as any other involuntarily laid-off teacher. 
In the absence of written notice by either party, the teacher shall remain on voluntary layoff. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
years. 
Indent at:  -0.03"
I. The Board will make an effort to find another teaching position for involuntarily laid -off 
teachers. This will be accomplished by sending a list of all involuntarily laid-off teachers to a 
reasonable number of district(s) specifically requested by a teacher. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
shall be reimbursed by the Board for his/her actual cost of all direct-pay insurance benefits 
Indent at:  -0.03"
provided for in Article 26. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
for which qualified or has turned down training by the employer (at the employer's expense) 
Indent at:  -0.03"
to qualify him/her for existing vacancies. 
A curricular change is defined as the elimination and/or alteration of a program which 
requires the change in certification requirements for the teacher. The Board's liability for 
training is limited to one semester or sixteen (16) semester hours (or equivalent), whichever 
is greater. 
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 3 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.26" +
A. When the Board determines it is necessary to recall an ancillary teacher, the most senior 
Indent at:  0.03"
qualified (as defined in Article 10) teacher shall be recalled. Should the teacher refuse recall, 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
he/she shall be moved to the bottom of the recall list, but will not lose his/her seniority date. 
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
When a vacancy exists and the most senior laid-off teacher is qualified for the position but is 
not qualified or willing to become qualified for the position, said teacher will not be recalled 
but will retain his/her seniority and will be moved to the bottom of the recall list. 
124  
260
H. Written notice of involuntary layoff shall be received by all affected teacher(s) by May first. 
Teachers who are involuntarily laid-off will retain seniority and recall rights for three school 
J. A teacher who is still on layoff status at the commencement of the school year immediately 
following receipt of layoff notice in paragraph E. above, but is recalled prior to December 1, 
K. A teacher shall not be involuntarily laid-off because of curricular change unless such change 
would render the teacher non-qualified and he/she has refused other assignment opportunities 
38.138.6 Recalls shall be governed by provisions A. through H. 
In this event, the Board shall then recall the next most senior qualified teacher who accepts 
recall. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", Hanging:  0.5", Outline
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
Indent at:  -0.03"
If no laid -off teachers are qualified, then the Board shall hire a teacher to fill the vacancy. 
Nothing contained in this Article shall obligate the Board to transfer teachers or alter 
schedules to facilitate the recall of a laid-off teacher after October 1. 
Teachers, who are passed over for recall because they are not qualified for a vacancy, shall 
begin to accrue seniority from the date they are passed over in the same manner as if they had 
been recalled. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
K (under Layoffs) and Sections A and D (under Recall). 
Indent at:  -0.03"
C. Recall of involuntarily laid-off teachers will be based on reversal of paragraph B above under 
Layoff; i.e., the last laid-off shall be the first recalled except as may be modified by paragraph 
A under Recall above. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
of reemployment. Failure to respond in writing within the five calendar day period (postmark) 
Indent at:  -0.03"
will cause the employee to be moved to the bottom of the recall list. (Also see Section 2.7) 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
before the end of the school year, the teacher will be given a second notice confirming that 
Indent at:  -0.03"
he/she is not qualified to teach the ensuing year's assignment. The teacher will be laid off  if 
he/she either (1) fails to no tify the Superintendent or designee by June 25 that he/she will 
pursue the necessary course work to become qualified; or (2) notifies the Superintendent  or 
designee by June 25 that he/she will not pursue the necessary course work to become 
qualified. 
F. A teacher, who is notified prior to the commencement of a school year that it will be necessary 
to take classes in order to be qualified, will be permitted to complete the required classes prior 
to the start of the school year following his/her assignment for which requalification is 
required. The teacher is required to enroll in class(es) by April 1. 
G. A teacher who is laid off and who is paid unemployment compensation benefits (associated 
with his/her regular teaching assignment) during the summer immediately following the 
layoff and who is subsequently recalled to the teaching position at the beginning of the next 
school year will be paid according to annual salary rate, such that his/her unemployment 
compensation plus that annual salary rate will be equal to the rate of salary he/she would have 
earned for the school year had he/she not been laid off, subject to the following conditions: 
125  
261
B. No new teacher shall be hired before involuntarily laid -off teachers with recall rights who 
possess the necessary qualification have been given an opportunity for recall as per Sections 
D. Involuntarily laid-off teachers being recalled will be given five calendar days from the date 
of the receipt of a registered or certified letter of recall to indicate their acceptance or rejection 
E. Teachers who are scheduled to be laid off or transferred into positions for which they are not 
qualified will be given tentative notice by May 15 of hi s/her qualification deficiency. At or 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.79" +
been employed the entire school year. 
Indent at:  -0.29"
2. The salary earned through employment in the District shall not be less than his/her 
salary from same for a similar period during the preceding school year. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
provisions: 
Indent at:  -0.03"
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.79" +
teacher shall receive pay and fringe benefits equivalent to his/her full -time 
Indent at:  -0.29"
equivalency status. 
2. A shared-timeshared time or part-time teacher may be recalled to a full-time position. 
If the teacher accepts the recall to a full-time position, the teacher shall receive full 
pay and fringe benefits. 
3. A full-time teacher who has requested shared-timeshared time or part-time for the 
school year in which he/she is recalled may be recalled to a shared-timeshared time 
or part-time position. If the teacher accepts the recall to the shared-timeshared time 
or part-time position, the teacher shall receive pay and fringe benefits equivalent to 
his/her full-time equivalency status. 
4. A full-time teacher who has not requested shared-timeshared time or part -time for 
the school year in which he/she is recalled, may be recalled to a shared-timeshared 
time or part-time position. If the teacher accepts the recall to the shared-timeshared 
time or part-time position, the teacher shall receive pay prorated to his/her full-time 
equivalency status and shall receive full fringe benefits paid for by the Board. 
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
salary reduction plus one -day mandatory suspension without pay. The third offense shall be a 
proportionate salary reduction plus a five (5) day mandatory suspension without pay. 
Absences from parent-teacher conferences because of college -level classes shall be authorized if the 
teacher notifies the building principal at least three weeks prior to parent-teacher conferences. Teachers 
who are absent from parent -teacher conferences s hall make up the conference outside of regular 
teaching duties. 
126  
262
1. The total of unemployment compensation plus salary earned by employment in the 
District shall not be below that which the employee would have received had he/she 
H. The status of shared-timeshared time or part-time teachers who are recalled and the status of 
teachers recalled to shared-timeshared time or part -time shall be covered by the following  
1. A shared-timeshared time or part -time teacher may be recalled to a shared-
timeshared time or part -time position. The shared-timeshared time or part -time 
38.138.7 Teacher responsibilities. 
Unauthorized Absence. An absence without prior notification from the teacher to the administration 
or sub-caller shall be considered unauthorized. Time lost by unauthorized absence from duty will result 
in a proportionate salary reduction for the first offense. The second offense shall be a proportionate 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.13", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 4 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.5", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.13", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 4 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", Hanging:  0.54", Outline
Start at: 3 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.26" +
Indent at:  0.03"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13"
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
Indent at:  -0.03"
38.138.9 Class size 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", Hanging:  0.54", Outline
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
A. Maximum Enrollments.  When any class in a school reaches the maximum number of 
Start at: 3 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.26" +
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
Indent at:  -0.03", Tab stops:  0.75", Left + Not at  0.71"
1. Transfer student(s): 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.13", Numbered + Level: 4 +
a. within the school 
Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment:
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.5", Hanging:  0.13",
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  2.25" +
if necessary. 
Indent at:  2.5"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.38"
3. In the event of an emergency (defined as a situation which cannot be resolved by 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.13", Numbered + Level: 4 +
the above procedures) the planned maximum may be exceeded by two (2) pupils. 
Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment:
Left + Aligned at:  1.75" + Indent at:  2"
methods to numbers 1, 2 and 3 above. In this situation, the parties shall meet and 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.13", Numbered + Level: 4 +
Left + Aligned at:  1.75" + Indent at:  2"
Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment:
transfer of a teacher(s). 
Left + Aligned at:  1.75" + Indent at:  2"
c. Voluntary assignment of a sixth teaching period in the secondary buildings. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.38", Hanging:  0.38", Outline
(Pay shall be equal to one-fifth (1/5) of the teacher's pay rate.) 
numbered + Level: 5 + Numbering Style: a, b, c, … +
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -1.32" +
2) The number of sixth period class assignments the teacher has taught in past 
Indent at:  -0.57"
years. 
3) Teacher possesses the contractual requirements for teaching said course. 
4) Any other criteria upon which the parties agree. 
127  
263
38.138.8 Professional qualifications 
Qualifications: As used in this Article, the term "qualification" and "qualified" shall be defined as 
follows: 
A. To be qualified the ancillary teach er must be licensed in accordance with state and federal 
law. 
students, the Administration with the Association will formulate plans for handling the first 
enrollee over the maximum. The following shall be used as criteria in solving the 
overcrowding situation: 
b.to another building 
2. Hire an additional teacher, using rooms available in some other community facilities 
4. Either party to the master agreement may request a meeting to discuss alternative 
discuss alternative methods such as, but not limited to, those listed below: 
a. Voluntarily increasing shared-timeshared time or part-time/part-time assignments. 
b. Recall a laid -off teacher, which may possibly necessitate the involuntary 
d. The voluntary assigning of a sixth teaching period in the secondary may be 
accomplished after the following criteria have been considered: 
1) Availability and district-wide seniority within the department of the affected 
building. 
Indent at:  0.03"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", Hanging:  0.54", Outline
Start at: 3 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.26" +
Indent at:  0.03"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Numbered + Level: 5 + Numbering Style: a, b, c, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.38"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.38"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.13", Numbered + Level: 4 +
Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment:
Left + Aligned at:  1.75" + Indent at:  2"
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -1.06" +
Indent at:  -0.31"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.63", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 6 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
seniority list. This list is developed for and within the procedures of these subsections only. The 
intent is to allow as many different teachers as possible the opportunity to teach a sixth period 
when and if the assignment is necessary and agreeable to the Association, Board and teacher. 
High School/Middle School. Should it be necessary for a  sixth period assignment to go beyond 
the first semester, the assignment shall be re -offered within the same procedure as u sed in the 
first semester. The intent of re -offering is to allow another bargaining unit member the 
opportunity to voluntarily accept a sixth teaching assignment. 
methods of handling an overload of students at the secondary level. Should alternative proposals 
outlined in section 4 above not be acceptable to the parties, sections 1, 2 or 3 shall be 
implemented. 
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 3 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.26" +
A. Bargaining unit regular and extra-duty positions which will be vacant at the start of the next 
Indent at:  0.03"
school year shall be posted at each school, at the Administrative Center and at the TEA 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
Office. After building assignments are made, the resulting known vacancies will be posted 
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
seven (7) calendar days prior to the position being filled,  except by a substitute teacher. The 
posting shall contain the following information: 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.79" +
3. The academic and professional qualifications desired for the position 
Indent at:  -0.29"
4. The certification requirements and, if any, the accreditation requirements 
Teachers desiring transfer to one of the posted vacancies shall submit a transfer form to the 
Employee Services Department by the end of the day on the last day of the posting. Any 
application shall be confidential at the request of the employee. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
of interviews. The administrator will consider the applicants' qualifications as they relate to 
Indent at:  -0.03"
the posting as well as all applicants' respective length of area seniority (elementary, middle 
school and high school) with the District. 
+ Numbering Style: A, B, C, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment:
a teacher's request for voluntary transfer is denied, the teacher may reque st a meeting  with 
Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" + Indent at:  -0.03",
128  
264
If a qualified teacher accepts the assignment, he/she shall be placed at the bottom of a separate 
The intent of Section 4 is to allow the parties the opportunity to discuss and agree upon alternative 
38.138.10 Ancillary Teacher Transfers 
for seven (7) calendar days between May first and July thirty-first. All bargaining unit regular 
and extra-duty positions which become vacant during the school year shall be posted at least 
1. The building or special service department 
2. The tentative grade level or teaching schedule 
B. The Employee Services Department will forward all applications to the appropriate building 
administrator within seven (7) calendar days of the close of the posting period for scheduling 
C. After all qualified applicants have been interviewed, the Employee Services Department will 
inform all applicants of the results within ten (10) workdays following the last interview. If 
the building principal involved. At that meeting the teacher will be notified of the reasons for 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.5"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.5"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", Hanging:  0.5", Outline
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.11", Hanging:  0.17", Outline
numbered + Level: 4 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
Indent at:  -0.03"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Right: 
0.21", Space After:  12 pt, Outline numbered + Level: 3
Widow/Orphan control
the denial of the transfer request. This procedure may be continued to the Deputy 
Superintendent for Instruction, K-12 and then to the Superintendent of Schools. 
129  
265
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
Indent at:  -0.03"
E. When a school is opened that is not a receiving school for a closed school, the principal, if a 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
principal was transferred, may voluntarily transfer up to one -half of his/her current teachers  
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
teachers shall be placed without regard to seniority ranking. In all cases teachers selected 
shall be selected in accordance with the transfer provisions of this Agreement. New teachers 
shall be hired if current teachers, by transfer, do  not staff the building. All staffing shall be 
completed by June 1. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
thirty (30) days before school starts. For any subsequent changes the teacher will be notified 
Indent at:  -0.03"
in writing prior to the change taking effect. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
substitute teacher. 
Indent at:  -0.03"
Vacancies occurring during the school year will be filled on a tentative or temporary basis 
until the end of the school year. The Board is not required to fill the vacancy from within the 
District and at its option may choose to hire a teacher to fill the vacancy for the duration of 
the school year. If the teacher originally in the position does not return for the ensuing school 
year, then the Board shall post the position for the ensuing school year. It is understood  that 
a teacher hired to fill a vacancy which occurred during the school year may apply for the 
position should it be posted for the ensuing school year. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
information, including qualifications. All applicants who are employees of the District shall 
Indent at:  -0.03"
be given consideration and shall also receive written notification of the filling of the position. 
The Board supports a policy of promotion from within the District, except when local 
candidates fall short of qualifying well for the position in the judgment of the Administration. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
three (3) qualified transfer applicants. A transfer within a building shall be granted to teachers 
Indent at:  -0.03"
currently assigned to the building who request a transfer. At the elementary level, Grades K-
2 and Grades 3-5 shall be considered as separate disciplines for the application of this Section. 
130  
266
D. When new buildings are to be opened, earlier posting dates may be added to the  schedule 
in A. above. 
to the new building. The remaining positions shall be filled by teachers transferring from other 
buildings or returning from leave. If a current principal is not assigned, up to one-half of the 
F. All teachers shall be given written notice of their tentative assignments for the  forthcoming 
year no later than the first day of June or as soon thereafter as possible, at any rate, at least 
G. All bargaining unit regular and extra-duty positions which become vacant during the school 
year shall be posted at least seven (7) workdays prior to the position being filled, except by a 
H. All administrative vacancies wil l be publicized by being posted at each school, at the 
Administrative Center, and at the TEA Office. The posting shall include all pertinent 
I. Prior to the beginning of the school year, a currently employed teacher shall be granted lateral 
transfers before a new teacher is hired for the position in question, providing there are at least 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.29", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
Indent at:  -0.03"
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
is one requested by the teacher on his/her own or at the suggestion of the Administration; 
Indent at:  -0.03"
(3) an involuntary transfer is one not requested by the teacher; (4) qualification shall be 
primary qualifications as defined in 36.7. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
Indent at:  -0.03", Tab stops: Not at  0.7"
1. A teacher may elect any vacant position for which he/she is certified/qualified. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1", Numbered + Level: 4 +
Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment:
receiving school shall be defined as those buildings of the same kind  (elementary, 
middle school, high school) who are receiving more than 10 percent of the students 
from the closing school. Teachers who are certified/qualified shall bump by seniority 
into positions in the receiving schools. Percentage of teachers from the closed 
building available for the receiving school shall be equal, or as equal as possible, to 
the percentage of students from the closed building assigned to the receiving school. 
In the case of more than one receiving school, teachers of the closed school may select 
their receiving school. 
3. Any staff which is unassigned as a result of B above shall be assigned to positions for 
which they qualify or if no position exists they shall be laid-off. 
4. In the event buildings are closed after the school year has started the procedure for 
bumping (assigning the teachers) shall be referred to the Professional Relations 
Committee to ensure that "double bumping" does not occur. 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.53" +
Section is in the case where a building or department has an excess of teacher’s due to changes 
Indent at:  -0.03", Tab stops:  0.75", Left + Not at  0.68"
in enrollment. In such a case, vacancies in other buildings will be filled by the least senior 
teacher in the affected building or department who is qualified for the vacant position. 
However, a more senior qualified teacher in the affected building or department may 
volunteer to be transferred as excess staff at the same level to which the teacher is currently 
assigned (i.e., elementary K-2, elementary 3-5, middle school, or high school) instead of the 
least senior teacher, provided that the least senior teacher would not otherwise be laid off. A 
teacher volunteering to be the excess teacher in a building may withdraw his/her request to 
be an excess  teacher, but must do so by providing written notice to the Superintendent or 
designee by the last student day of the school year. Excess teachers shall be tentatively 
assigned to known vacant positions no later than the fifth work d ay prior to the end of the 
teachers’ work year, whenever possible. At the elementary level, Grades K-2 and Grades 3- 5 
shall be considered as separate disciplines for the application of this Article. 
131  
267
J. Definitions. When used in this Article, the following terms shall mean: (1) A transfer is a 
change in building, grade level, department, course or subject matter; (2) a voluntary transfer 
K. In the event the district elects to close a building the teachers in the affected building shall be 
reassigned according to the following procedures: 
2. Teachers who do not elect to fill positions as in A above shall be allowed to bump 
teachers in buildings which are receiving students from the closed schools. A 
L. Teachers are subject to involuntary transfers from position to position and from building to 
building at the discretion of the Superintendent or his/her designee. The one exception to this 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.25", Outline
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
Formatted: Inde