 from building to 
building at the discretion of the Superintendent or his/her designee.  
 
16.4 A teacher who is transferred shall be certified and qualified to teach in the new assignment.   
 
16.5 If transfers are found to be necessary, the teacher will be notified.  Upon request of the teacher, 
a meeting will be held between the teacher, the TEA and the Assistant Superintendent, Human 
ResourcesEmployee Services , at which time the teacher will be notified of the reasons for such 
transfer. 
 
16.6   In the event a change in assignment occurs after June 1 and prio r to the beginning of school 
in the fall, knowledge of this transfer will be sent to the teacher in writing.  
 
ARTICLE 17.  SENIORITY 
 
17.1  Seniority is based on date of hire minus time spent on unpaid leave of absence, except for 
health and military leaves.  Seniority is lost when employment as a teacher is terminated.  Date of 
hire is defined as most recent first day of work or date of teach er signing first contract, whichever is 
first.  In case of equal seniority, teacher seniority placement shall be determined by a one -time 
drawing among teachers tied with each other.  The time and place of drawing shall be determined by 
the Association and Board and announced to all teachers.  The first name drawn shall rank ahead of 
the second, the second ahead of the third, etc.   
 
The drawings shall take place at the Administrative Center at the date and time announced five (5) 
days prior to the drawing.  A teacher who does not participate in the drawing shall have his/her number 
drawn by the Association President. 
 
17.2 Unpaid leave of absence  shall be deducted in monthly multiples from the teacher's accrued 
seniority. 
 
17.3 To receive seniority credit f or a month, a teacher must work until on or after the fifteenth 
(15th) of the month or return to work on or before the fifteenth (15th) of the month. 
 
17.4 Should the fifteenth (15th) of a month be a non- scheduled work day, the teacher must work 
the last s cheduled work day prior to the fifteenth (15th) of the month or return the first scheduled 
work day after the fifteenth (15th) of the month. 
 
17.5 Seniority credit shall be earned at the ra te of ten (10) months per year. To earn credit for a 
month, the provisions of 
17.3 and 17.4 shall apply.  
 
17.6 A teacher who becomes a member of the administration shall retain previous seniority but 
shall not accrue seniority while not in the teacher unit. 
 
17.7 An updated seniority list shall be provided by October 1 on a yearly basis. 
 
270
 
33 
17.8 A substitute who is hired to replace an absent teacher and is ultimately placed under contract 
for the position shall have a date of hire as the first day in the assignment. 
 
17.9 When a teacher's absence due to injury or illness exceeds forty (40) consecutive days beyond 
the accumulated sick leave, the experience credit for these excess days shall be deducted on the basis 
of the closest tenth of a year. 
 
ARTICLE 18.  LEAVE PAY 
 
18.1  Annual Leave.   Fourteen (14) leave days per year  shall be allowed, without loss of pay, for 
the following reasons: 
 
 A. Personal illness 
 
 B. Serious illness in the immediate family, which includes spouse, children and the members 
of the employee's household, parents and foster parents of employee or spouse and 
brothers and sisters of the employee. 
 
 C. Death of a relative 
 
 D. A teacher may use a maximum of twenty (20) days from his/her accumulated annual leave 
for the purposes of adoption.  In instances involving international adoption where travel 
outside of the United States is required, a teacher may use a maximum of thirty (30) days 
from his/her accumulated annual leave for the purpose of adoption. 
 
 E. Four (4) of the fourteen (14) annual leave days may be used for personal business, not 
including activities for pleasure. 
 
 F. The teacher may borrow in advance from the following year's annual leave allowance by 
executing a promissory note through the TEA in favor of the School District, said note to 
be co-signed by the TEA.  The teacher may borrow a maximum of five (5) days from the 
following year's annual leave allowance. 
 
18.2 Accumulated Leave Days.  All the unused leave days shall be added at the end of each fiscal 
year to the employee's unlimited accumulated leave day reserve.  Said leave day reserve may be used 
for reasons A, B, C and D above and/or as a basis for calculating severance pay. 
 
18.3 Absence from a Paid Workday.  When an employee is absent on an in-service day or other 
paid workday, he/she shall not receive his/her salary and may be subject to penalties for such day 
unless his/her absence is covered under the preceding paragraphs of this Section or other sections of 
this Agreement. 
 
18.4 Absence before or after a Paid Holiday. Anyone wishing to take days off without pay 
before or aft er a paid holiday must make special arrangements with the Assistant Superintendent, 
Human ResourcesEmployee Services ahead of time, or risk loss of pay for the holiday.  If more people 
request such time off than the Administration is able to provide substitutes for, the earlier requests 
will receive more consideration. 
 
18.5 Adjustment due to Unfinished Contract. Instructional personnel who leave the 
employment of the District before termination of the current year's contract for reasons other than 
those beyond his/her control will forfeit one (1) leave day for each school month remaining at the 
date of termination of services, whether or not such leave days have already been used.  Adjustment 
for such forfeiture shall be made on the employee's final paycheck. 
 
271
 
34 
18.6 Absence due to court appearance or hearings before an administrative agency in a case 
connected with employment in the District or due to being subpoenaed on any proceeding connected 
with school duties will be paid for without being charged against sick leave or business leave days. 
 
A. Absence in non- school-related court appearances may also be paid and charged against 
leave days with administrative approval. 
 
B. If a teacher must serve on jury duty, he/she will be paid the difference between his/her 
jury pay and his/her regular pay, without loss of leave days. 
 
18.7  Absence due to illness resulting from contact with children at school, if the contagious contact 
can be traced, will be paid for without deduction from sick leave days in the case of diseases such as 
mumps, measles, scarlet fever, whooping cough, chicken pox, scabies, pediculosis and conjunctivitis, 
but not for diseases such as influenza, flu or colds. 
 
When a student is found to have or have had a contagious disease, teachers in the building will be 
kept notified of the nature of the contagious disease. 
 
18.8 Absence due to religious observances  may be deducted from current leave as personal 
business days up to a maximum of three (3) more days of leave than normally allowed for personal 
business. 
 
18.9 The Board will reimburse a teacher for the appropriate expenses incurred while attending a 
Board approved conference upon submission of an itemized expense sheet.  Travel, meals, lodging, 
and registration fees shall be deemed appropriate expenses of the Board, as well as the cost of the 
substitute teacher needed to relieve the participant.  A teache r attending such conferences and 
meetings shall be granted sufficient leave time to attend without loss of compensation.  Teachers will 
submit, upon request, a written report regarding such conferences. 
 
18.9 Time off for selective service, physical or men tal examinations, and hearings regarding 
reclassification will not be deducted from leave days. 
 
 
ARTICLE 19.   MATERNITY, CHILD CARE, AND ADOPTION LEAVES 
 
19.1  The Board of Education shall grant a leave of absence for reasons of maternity, adoption or 
child care under the following conditions: 
 
 A. For Maternity: 
 
   a. A teacher may use sick days for the period of her disability to take a short -term 
leave to commence when the teacher and her physician determine that the teacher 
can no longer carry out her necessary teaching duties and to terminate when her 
physician determines she is able to return to work.   Sick days may be used for up 
to six calendar weeks after the birth of the object child.  In the event of a cesarean 
section, sick days may be used for up to eight calendar weeks.  
 
   b. In the event of miscarriage or death of the object child of the leave, the leave of 
absence will be terminated upon the request of the teacher.  She shall be returned 
to a position for which she is certified.  The gr anting of any such leaves, as 
described above, will in no way interrupt seniority and other rights attained thereto. 
 
 B. For Child Care: 
 
272
 
35 
1. A teacher may elect to remain home with the object child for the balance of the school 
year in which the child is born.  If the teacher so indicated by written application two 
(2) months prior to anticipated birth, a childcare leave shall be granted. 
 
2. A request for an extension of the childcare leave shall be granted upon written request 
to the Board by March first of the school year preceding the extension. 
 
3. A combination of a maternity and a childcare leave shall not exceed four semesters 
following the semester or summer in which the child was born.  In any case, the return 
from leave shall coincide with the beginning of the school year, except the Board may 
grant a leave that provides for a teacher to return from the leave other than at the 
beginning of the school year. 
 
4. A teacher who is utilizing FMLA for childcare purposes on the last day of the teachers’ 
school year shall not be considered to have used his/her first available year of childcare 
leave under the collective bargaining agreement.   
 
5. A teacher may use up to ten (10) consecutive leave days for the purpose of paternity 
leave.  
 
 C. For Adoption: 
 
  An adoption leave shall be granted by the Board for up to one (1) school year upon request 
of the teacher.  Requests for adoption leaves should be made as soon as the adoption is 
known to be imminent. 
 
 D. Any extension of any maternity, child care or adoption leave beyond the time provided in 
19.1 A, B or C may be granted by the Board.  The denial of any extension beyond the time 
provided in 19.1 A, B or C is not subject to the grievance procedure.   
 
 E. For return from maternity, childcare, or adoption leave, see 20.8. 
 
19.2 Any teacher may receive up to one (1) year leave without pay for purposes of family care. 
This is subject to renewal at the will of the Board. 
 
 
ARTICLE 20.   LEAVES OF ABSENCE - GENERAL 
 
20.1 Military Leave.  Any employee covered by the salary schedule who terminates employment 
in the School District to perform active service in the Armed Forces of the United States is entitled to 
reemployment in accordance with applicable State and/or Federal law.  
 
In the event of reemployment, the following provisions shall apply: 
 
 A. Accrual of seniority shall be granted. 
 B. Up to four (4) increments may be added as if the employee had been in the School District's 
employ during the time of such active service in the Armed Forces. 
 
20.2  Teaching-out-of-District Leave.  Any teacher may receive up to one (1) year leave for the 
purpose of teaching outside the continental limits of the United States or in a recognized exchange 
teacher program or in an overseas or domestic Peace Corps assignment.  Full credit shall be given for 
time spent in these programs. 
 
273
 
36 
In the event the Board is notified in advance that the teaching assignment is a two -year assignment, 
the Board shall, at the request of the teacher, extend the leave for one year; all other requests for 
extensions shall be granted at the discretion of the Board. 
 
20.3 TEA Business Leave.  Up to two (2) officers of the TEA or members appointed by the TEA, 
upon written request, shall be given a leave of absence, without pay, for the purpose of performin g 
duties for the TEA.  Up to one (1) year's credit on the salary schedule may be given for the time spent 
in this program.  A second year's credit may be given upon mutual agreement. 
 
20.4 Education Advancement Leave.  Any teacher may receive up to one (1) year's leave without 
pay for purposes of continuing education.  The teacher must submit an application, a program of 
study, approved acceptance documents from the university of the teacher's choice, and a written 
statement from the teacher demonstrating the positive contributions that may be provided the school 
system upon completion of the leave. 
 
In the event the Board is notified in advance that the program of study is a two -year program, the 
Board shall, at the request of the teacher, extend the leave for one year; all other requests for 
extensions shall be granted at the discretion of the Board. 
 
20.5 Health Leave.  Upon the recommendation of the teacher's physician, a leave of absence shall 
be granted up to one school year, plus any unfinished school year.  Two annual extensions of the 
health leave shall be granted upon written request of a teacher accompanied by a written statement 
by his/her physician.  When the employee's health permits his/her return to duty, he/she shall notify 
the Superintendent in writing and submit a statement from his/her personal physician certifying 
fitness to return to duty.  The Superintendent shall give the returning teacher a teaching assignment 
equivalent to the assignment for which he/she is certified and qualified. 
 
20.6 Elected Public Office Leaves.  A member of the Association, who is a tenure teacher, elected 
to any local, state or federal office, may make application to the Board for a temporary leave of 
absence without pay, for a period of time not to exceed the te rm of office to which that member has 
been elected and upon receipt of such application, such leave shall be granted by the Board. 
 
20.7 Personal Leave.  Any teacher may receive a one (1) school year leave without pay for 
exceptional reasons.  The teacher shall submit a letter of application identifying the exceptional 
reasons for requesting said leave.  The leave shall coincide with the school year.  The teacher must 
give written notice by March 1 of intent to return the following fall.  A teacher returning from personal 
leave will be assigned to a position for which he/she is certified and qualified.  
 
20.8 Reinstatement from Leave.   Notice of intent to return at the beginning of the school year 
must be given by March 1.   
 
Teachers do not have a right to return from leave prior to its expiration date. There will be no loss of 
job security for refusing positions prior to the end of the leave. 
 
20.9 Full Salary Credit for Miscellaneous Leaves.  Credit on the salary schedule for experience 
will be given for the time spent on the following leaves: military, sabbatical, Peace Corps service, 
overseas teaching and exchange teaching. 
 
ARTICLE 21.   SABBATICAL LEAVE 
 
274
 
37 
21.1 Sabbatical Leave.  The Board recognizes the benefits to the teachers and the School District 
of a systematic plan for sabbatical leave to qualified teaching personnel and therefore agrees to the 
establishment of the following at one-half (1/2) pay and full insurance benefits. 
 
 A. Up to two (2) members of the staff may be granted sabbatical leave each calendar year.  
Candidates for sabbatical leave shall be reviewed jointly by the Board and its 
representative and the TEA. 
 
  1. The deadlines for making application for sabbatical leave shall be April first and 
December first, for the first and second semesters respectively. 
 
  2. To be eligible, the applicant must have been employed a minimum of seven (7) 
consecutive years in the Troy School District, and possess a perma nent teaching 
certificate.  Approved leaves of absence will not count toward the seven (7) year 
requirement, but will not interrupt the consecutive years of service. 
 
  3. Sabbatical leave will be granted for at least one (1) school system semester or for 
one (1) school year.  In the event the Board is notified in advance that the program 
is a two (2) year program, a one - (1-) year educational advancement leave (Article 
20, Section 
20.4) will be granted for the second year.  In the case of a two- (2-) year 
program, one year's full salary shall be prorated over the course of the two years. 
 
  4. The applicant must furnish upon request one (1) written report per semester to the 
Board.  This report shall concern itself with his/her progress while on sabbatical 
leave. 
 
  5. A screening committee will be appointed by the Superintendent.  The teacher 
members of this committee shall be selected from a list submitted by the TEA.  The 
Superintendent may request additional names be added to the list in the event he/she 
feels he/she is unable to make a selection from the list submitted.  This committee 
will consist of one administrator, one senior high school teacher, one middle school 
teacher, two elementary school teachers, and one person from "special services."  
This committee will make a recommendation to the Superintendent.  The committee 
will give consideration to the following when evaluating candidates: 
 
   a. Overall benefit to the school system 
   b. Type of work to be pursued 
   c. Length of service in Troy 
   d. Proportional grade level distribution 
 
  6. The screening committee will make its recommendations within thirty (30) days of 
the application deadline. 
 
  7. All applicants will be notified in writing of the Board's decision by the 
Superintendent or his/her representative. 
 
  8. Before beginning the sabbatical leave, the teacher shall enter into a contract, to return 
to active service in the Troy School District for a period of at least two (2) years after 
the expiration of such leave.  A teacher who does not fulfill this agreement shall 
repay to the Board, or shall have furnished a cash bond in the necessary amount 
received by the teacher during the sabbatical leave.  This rule shall not apply in cases 
where the person becomes incapacitated or in cases where the rule is waived by the 
Board. 
 
275
 
38 
 B. A teacher, upon return from a sabbatical leave, shall be restored to his/her former position 
or to a position of like nature, seniority and status.  Any period spent on sabbatical leave 
shall be treated as teaching service for purposes of applying the salary schedule set forth 
in Schedule A of this Agreement and seniority credit. 
 
21.2 Retirement credit and responsibility for retirement payments shall be as set forth in the 
applicable law, rules and regulations of the Michigan Public School Employees' Retirement System 
(MPSERS). 
 
ARTICLE 22.   LINES OF COMMUNICATION 
 
22.1 Any communication prior to the filing of a grievance between the interested parties shall 
follow the hereinafter prescribed order and shall be completed by the end of the second school day: 
 
 A. Teacher to department head or immediate supervisor where applicable 
 
 B. Teacher and department head, where concerned, to building principal 
 
 C. Teacher, department head (if desired) and principal to the Assistant Superintendent, 
Human ResourcesEmployee Services or other Central Office administrators 
 
If mutual understanding of the situation or problem under discussion has not been reached, the teacher 
may elect to use the Grievance Procedure provided elsewhere in this Agreement.  A teacher may have 
a TEA representative present. 
 
ARTICLE 23.   GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 
 
23.1 Purpose.   The purpose of this procedure is to secure, at the most appropriate  administrative 
level, equitable solution to the problems which may from time to time arise affecting the welfare or 
working conditions of teachers as provided for in this Agreement.  Both parties agree that these 
proceedings shall be informal and confidential. 
 
23.2 Definition.   A grievance shall mean a claimed violation of this Master Agreement or a 
complaint involving its interpretation or application.  The grievance procedure shall not apply to any 
matter which is prescribed by law, or state regulation s, or over which the Board is without power to 
act.  However, the right to grieve shall not be denied in case of an alleged misinterpretation of 
established law or state regulation.  A grievance may be filed by an aggrieved teacher or by the TEA. 
 
23.3 Procedure.   Since it is important that grievances be processed as rapidly as possible, the 
number of days indicated at each step should be considered as maximum and every effort will be 
made to expedite the process.  The time limits specified may, however, b e extended by mutual 
agreement. 
 
In the event the last day for action falls on a Saturday, a Sunday, or holiday, the action date shall be 
extended until the next school day.  The counting of days in Steps 1, 2, or 3 begins the day after either 
of the parties has received a reply. 
 
At the time of filing, it shall be the responsibility of the grievant and administrator with whom the 
grievance is initially filed to prepare copies.  The administrator may prepare copies for the Board or 
its agent, and the teacher may prepare copies for the TEA or its agent. 
 
Copies of replies at each step shall be sent to the administration, teacher and TEA. 
 
In the event a grievance is filed on or after the first of June, it shall be resolved prior to the beginning 
of the next school year, unless the grievance requires more rapid processing, in which case normal 
time limits shall apply. 
276
 
39 
 
Step One. A teacher with a grievance shall first discuss it with his/her principal or supervisor.  
Such grievance shall be reduced to written form and discussed within ten (10) working days from the 
time of the incident or completion of the "lines of communication" over which the teacher is aggrieved 
or following his/her reasonable ability to have knowledge of the incident.  At his/her option the 
teacher may invite a TEA representative to be present while the grievance is discussed.  Every effort 
shall be made to resolve the grievance informally; however, the teacher will assure the principal 
(supervisor) that the topic under discussion is in fact a grievance. 
 
Step Two. If the grievance is not resolved at Step One, or in the event that no decisio n has been 
rendered within five (5) days, he/she or the TEA may refer such grievance in writing to the Assistant 
Superintendent, Human ResourcesEmployee Services within five (5) days.  Within the five (5) days 
after the Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources Employee Services receives the grievance, the 
responsible Central Office Administrator(s) shall meet with the aggrieved teacher and/or the TEA and 
the principal and/or supervisor in an effort to resolve the grievance.  The teacher may invite the TEA 
representative(s) (not more than three) to be present at this meeting, at which time the TEA will be 
given an opportunity to present its view of the  individual teacher's grievance.  The decision on the 
grievance shall be rendered in writing in five (5) days. 
 
Step Three.   If the grievance is not resolved at Step Two, or if a notice that no hearing will be 
granted is received, the TEA may request, wit hin fifteen (15) days that the matter be submitted to 
impartial arbitration.  It is understood that only the TEA may pursue a grievance to Step Three.  If the 
grievance is to be submitted to impartial arbitration, a request shall be sent to the American Arbitration 
Association requesting their services.  The selection of an arbitrator and the conducting of the hearing 
will be in accordance with their procedures and rules.  The parties may agree that the arbitration 
procedure on an individual case basis shall be expedited.  The decision of the impartial arbitrator shall 
be final and binding on all parties.  The impartial arbitrator shall have no power to add to, subtract 
from, disregard, alter, change or modify any of the terms of this Agreement.  The expense s and fee, 
if any, of the impartial arbitrator shall be shared equally by both parties. 
 
23.4 Miscellaneous. 
 
A. Grievances filed at Step One shall be passed on to the proper step immediately when it has 
been determined that the administrators at  the above-stated step do not have the authority to 
act on the grievance. 
 
B. It is assumed that grievance problems will be handled at times other than when the teacher is 
at work and the members of the TEA and administration will be present to process grievances 
promptly.  Release time for the purpose of processing grievances at Steps One and Two, 
inclusive, will be provided for the grievant, witnesses and the TEA representative by mutual 
agreement between the TEA and the appropriate administrative level personnel.  Release time 
shall be provided for witnesses, the grievant, and the TEA representatives for the purpose of 
participating in arbitration hearings as provided for in Step Three.  All release time shall not 
cause the released parties to suffer loss of salary or any leave days.  The TEA will make every 
effort to notify the Human ResourcesEmployee Services Department at least forty-eight (48) 
hours in advance. 
 
C. If the teacher pursued the grievance without TEA support as prescribed in Step Two, the right 
of the TEA to be present and to present a view at hearings in Step Two is preserved, and the 
TEA is to receive copies of written decisions at all steps. 
 
D. If more than one teacher has a similar complaint, the TEA may file a grievance to be 
commenced at Step Two, in lieu of multiple individual grievances. 
 
277
 
40 
E. Failure at any step of this procedure to communicate the decision on a grievance within a 
specified time limit is cause for relief sought to be granted, provided the TEA notifies the 
appropriate administrative agent that they have failed to answer a grievance in a timely fashion 
and such failure to answer continues for five (5) days from receipt of notice that such response 
has not been made. 
 
F. Failure to file the grievance in writing as specified in Steps One and Two sha ll mean the 
grievance is waived.  Failure to forward the grievance to Steps Two through Three shall mean 
that the grievance is waived, providing the administrator at the previous step notifies the TEA 
that such forwarding of the grievance has not taken place in a timely manner and that the TEA 
continues its failure to forward the grievance for five (5) days after receipt of notification of 
failure to proceed.  
 
G. If the employee elects to be represented, he/she may be present at any step of the grievance 
procedure where the grievance is to be discussed except that he/she need not be present where 
it is mutually agreed that no facts are in dispute and that the sole question is the interpretation 
of this Agreement. 
 
H. The filing of a grievance shall in no way inte rfere with the rights of the Board to proceed in 
carrying out its management responsibilities, subject to the final decision on the grievance. 
 
I. The TEA may process a grievance on behalf of an employee or group of employees.  
Grievances processed by the TEA on behalf of an individual must be signed at Step One and 
Two, whichever is appropriate, or the individual employee must sign a letter authorizing the 
TEA to process a grievance on his/her behalf.  A grievance processed by the TEA on behalf 
of a group of employees must be signed by at least one (1) member of that group at Step One 
or Two, whichever is appropriate, or a letter signed by at least one (1) member of that group 
authorizing the TEA to process said grievance. 
 
J. During the pendency of any proceedings and until a final determination has been reached, all 
proceedings shall be private, and any preliminary disposition will not be made public without 
the agreement of all parties, except as otherwise may be required by law. 
K. There shall be no repr isals of any kind by any administrative personnel taken against any 
party-in-interest or his/her TEA representative, or any other participant in the procedure set 
forth therein by reason of such participation. 
 
L. All documents, communications, and records dealing with the processing of a grievance shall 
be filed separately from the personnel files of the participants. 
 
M. Forms for filing grievances (Appendix 1), service notices, taking appeals, making reports and 
recommendations, and other necessary documents s hall be given appropriate distribution by 
the Superintendent so as to facilitate operation of procedures set forth herein. 
 
N. Grievances which have not been resolved prior to the expiration of this Agreement shall 
continue to be processed according to the terms of the Agreement until resolved. 
 
O. Grievances challenging alleged violations of contract occurring during the last two (2) weeks 
of school (other than continuing violations) shall be filed in compliance with the time limits 
specified in Step One or Step  Two, whichever is applicable; however, processing of all 
grievances shall be suspended for forty -five (45) calendar days during the summer recess.  
The forty-five- (45-) day period shall be determined by the TEA which shall notify the Board, 
in writing, in advance of the dates of the suspension period.  
 
ARTICLE 24.   NEGOTIATION PROCEDURES 
278
 
41 
 
24.1 Discussion of Non-Agreement Items.   It is agreed that items not covered by this Agreement 
but of common concern to the TEA, teachers and administrators in the school system may be 
discussed from time to time.  The practice of free and open discussion between the TEA, teachers and 
administrators at all levels is to be preserved and the formulation of an agreement is not intended to 
limit the areas of discussion or concern. 
 
24.2 Negotiating Teams.   In any negotiations herein described, neither party shall have any 
control over the selection of the negotiating or bargaining representatives of the other party and each 
party may select its representatives within or outside the school district.  It is recognized that no final 
agreement between the parties may be executed without ratification by  a majority of the Board and 
by a majority of the membership of the TEA, but the parties mutually pledge that representatives 
selected by each shall be clothed with all necessary power and authority to make proposals, consider 
proposals and make concession s in the course of negotiations or bargaining, subject only to such 
ultimate ratification. 
 
24.3 Negotiation Time.  Negotiations shall be carried on at times mutually agreed upon and 
essentially outside of the teacher's regular working period. 
 
24.4 Annually, individual teacher contracts for the following school year for non-tenure personnel, 
including those recommended for tenure, will be issued on or before June 1 of the current school year.  
The individual contracts issued to non- tenure teachers and those receiving their first tenure contract  
shall be returned to the Human ResourcesEmployee Services Department on or before the tenth work 
day after issuance.  The contract will contain the current year's teacher salary figure until a new 
Agreement has been achieved.   Once a teacher receives a tenure teacher contract, such contract will 
be considered to be continuing until such time that the teacher is notified to the contrary.  Tenure 
teachers will receive an annual salary notification.  All contracts issued by the District will be subject 
to the Master Agreement entered into between the Board and the TEA. 
 
ARTICLE 25.   MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
25.1 The Board may use any legal and reasonable procedure to establish facts in any investigation 
instituted within its jurisdiction involving employees, students and/or school property. 
 
25.2 At each regular and special Board meeting, the TEA will be provided with copies of minutes 
of previous meetings, the Superintendent's recommendations, monthly financial r eports, the agenda, 
and other public materials.  Copies of the agenda and administrative recommendations will be sent 
via intra-district mail to the Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources Employee Services and the 
officers of the TEA and the building representatives, with two (2) copies being sent to the President.  
The list of persons to receive these materials shall be furnished to the Central Office and kept current 
by the TEA. 
 
The TEA shall be duly advised by the Board of fiscal, tax and major budget ary programs affecting 
the District. 
 
25.3 This Agreement shall supersede any rules, regulations or practices of the Board which shall 
be contrary to or inconsistent with its terms or any terms contained in any individual teacher contracts 
heretofore in ef fect.  All future individual teacher contracts shall be made expressly subject to the 
terms of this Agreement.  The provisions of this Agreement shall be incorporated into and be 
considered part of the established policies of the Board by reference. 
 
279
 
42 
25.4 Fifty (50) printed copies of this Agreement shall be prepared at the expense of the Board for 
the TEA.  Each member shall have access to a copy of the collective bargaining agreement on the 
District’s Intranet site, may print a copy of the agreement on a district printer. 
 
25.5 If any provisions of this Agreement or any application of the Agreement to any employee or 
group of employees should be found to be contrary to law, then such provision or application shall 
not be deemed valid except to the extent permitted by law, but all other provisions or applications 
shall continue in full force and effect.  The parties shall meet and renegotiate any provision or 
application of the Agreement found contrary to law. 
 
25.6 Professional Relations Committee.  The Board and the TEA will establish a committee of 
not to exceed six members, three from each party, which will meet on a regular basis during the school 
year to discuss and study matters of mutual interest concerning the Troy School District which fall 
within the provisions of this contract and/or other matters of mutual concern.  The purpose of these 
meetings shall be to provide a means whereby: 
 
A. The items of concern to the TEA may be brought to the attention of the Board 
representatives for consideration. 
 
B. The items of concern to the Board may be brought to the attention of the TEA 
representatives for consideration. 
 
C. A high level of mutual understanding may be maintained. 
 
D. To clarify and/or assist in interpreting the language of the contract. 
 
E.  To identify any committees that exist in the District and discuss their goals and progress.  
 
The operating procedures and meeting times for discussions of the committee shall be determined by 
the committee.  However, the committee shall not meet while negotiations for a successor collective 
bargaining agreement are in progress except to complete a project. 
 
25.7 Schedules B, C and D. 
 
A. When known, the Board shall publish and post in each school a list of all positions which 
will be filled, and paid for at the scheduled rates, for the school year.  If during the year 
they plan to fill any additional positions, the TEA will be notified, and the notification 
placed also in each school.  No employee of the District will be asked to volunteer for 
any position not included in Schedules B, C or D. 
 
B. Contracts shall be issued for extra -curricular sponsorships prior to the start of the 
season/activity.  A teacher who takes an extra duty position and wishes to resign shall 
give at least two (2) weeks' written notice to his/her principal.  Salary for the position will 
be prorated. 
 
C. If during the year a teacher wishes to organize and/or sponsor a club or activity not 
previously listed on Schedules B, C or D, the teacher must obtain administrative approval 
in writing by the  Administration, and such administrator shall be responsible for the 
proper management process for achieving club or activity status.  The placement of the 
club or activity on the appropriate schedule shall cause the Board and TEA to negotiate 
a rate of compensation within thirty (30) days after approval by the Administration. 
 
25.8 If an economic portion of this Agreement that is not enforced because of questioned legality 
later becomes legal, or would have been legal had payment been made, the Board will pay all affected 
teachers retroactive monetary benefits as soon as feasible after the legality has been determined. 
280
 
43 
 
25.9  Automobile Insurance.  A teacher using his/her automobile while performing or acting on 
authorized school business shall have automobile insurance or be responsible equal to the state 
minimum insurance requirements. 
 
In case of an accident while on such business, the Board carries a policy on "hired and non -hired" 
automobiles that picks up after the individual's insurance leaves off. 
 
25.10 Professional Development and Educational Improvement.  The Board agrees to pay the 
cost of tuition and texts for in -service courses initiated by the Board and will recognize and accept 
whatever credit accrues from their satisfactory completion. 
 
25.11 Outdoor Education Program.   No teacher shall be required to participate in the outdoor 
education program.  Participation in this program shall, to the extent possible, be limited to fifth grade 
teachers and students. 
 
25.12 Evaluation of Schedules B, C and D Positions.   If positions as set forth in Schedules B, C 
and D are to be evaluated, it shall be done with the full knowledge of the person being evaluated by 
his/her administrative supervisor.  If the Board makes any changes in the current instruments or adds 
new instruments, the TEA shall be so notified before the instrument becomes operational.  The TEA 
shall be provided a copy of all current evaluation instruments. 
 
25.12   Teachers have the option not to report to their building on teacher work days at the end of the 
first, second and third quarter.  Teachers may leave on the last day of school once their work is 
complete and they have checked out with the building principal 
 
25.13  In an effort to limit the solicitation of teachers by agents for 403(b) and 457(b) products, the 
parties agree to cap the number of agents as of June 30, 2004.  The parties may agree to add an agent 
(who meets the district’s standards) upon mutual agreem ent if the parties determine a waiver is in 
their best interests.  It is understood that MEA Financial Services will remain a vendor for as long as 
it complies with the District’s requirements.  
 
25.14 Tenure in a Capacity Other than as a Classroom Teacher .  No employee under this 
Agreement shall acquire tenure in any capacity other than as a classroom teacher.  Any such tenure 
previously acquired by any teacher employed under this Agreement is waived. 
 
25.15 Summer School.  The Board agrees to pay bargaini ng unit teachers for such summer school 
work a rate of pay not less than that paid during the summer of 1992. 
 
25.16 Mentors. 
 
A. The District retains the discretion to assign mentors which assignments are subject to 
acceptance on a voluntary basis. Each mentor shall be paid Five Hundred Dollars ( $500) 
per mentee as designated within Schedule C. 
 
B. Each mentor shall be assigned one ( 1) mentee. All applications for exception are to be 
forwarded to the Assistant  Superintendent for Human Resources Employee Services. If 
mentors are approved to work with more than one (1)  teacher, meetings may not be 
concurrent, and mentors shall not be assig ned more than two (2) mentees. The mentor 
receives the contractual stipend for each mentee. 
 
C. The mentor assignment is typically for one (1) year. 
281
 
44 
 
D. Mentors and mentee s shall keep a log of their activities per District protocol. (See 
Appendix 2.) 
1. Mentors must provide mentees with at least fifteen (15) hours of mentor time. 
2. The only time mentors can count towards the minimum fifteen ( 15) hours is time 
outside of the mentor’s regularly scheduled work time. (E.g. Mentoring may occur on 
their duty-free lunch.) 
 
E. The log should be completed on or before June 1 st and forwarded to the Assistant 
Superintendent, Secondary Instruction or Assistant Superintendent, Elementary 
Instruction at Central Office. The log will be used to validate mentor session time. 
 
F. Mentors and mentees will be surveyed at the end of the year based on mentoring duties 
defined below in Section G. 
 
G. Mentors will work with mentees in a variety of ways on a variety of issues. The goal is to 
help the mentee improve his or her craft and attain/maintain effective performance. Issues 
that mentors and mentees might address include any of the following: 
1. Daily routines in school; 
2. Preparing lessons using District approved curriculum; 
3. Meeting standards; 
4. Interpreting MEAP/MME or other student growth or proficiency data; 
5. Classroom assignment; 
6. Preparing substitute teacher folders; 
7. Procedures for field trips; 
8. Building protocols and procedures; 
9. Where to access technology help; 
10. How to access e-mail and voice mail messages; 
11. Parent meetings; 
12. Classroom management; 
13. Student records; 
14. Where to find recourses for the classroom; 
15. IEP issues; 
16. School committees; and/or 
17. How to get involved in extra-curricular events. 
 
H. Mentors and mentees should find ways of touching ba se on regular occasions. Mentors 
should be able to serve as a guide to help the mentee manage curriculum, classroom 
management, and building/student/parent issues. 
 
I.    Mentor Expectations. 
Availability The mentor is always available to the mentee. The mentor frequently initiates contact with the mentee. 
Regular mentor sessions are planned. 
Problem Solving The mentor frequently leads the mentee into discovering possible solutions to problems on his or her own 
through asking questions and making suggestions. Occasionally, the mentor includes reference to how he or 
she would handle the situation. 
Reflective Questions The mentor frequently takes the opportunity to ask reflective questions of the mentee. The mentor utilizes 
reflective questioning skills to invite the mentee to look at his or her teaching practices with an eye for 
improvement. The mentor models *The Learning Cycle. 
Confidentiality The mentor is sensitive to and closely adheres to the “Firewall” between mentoring and evaluation. Topics 
and discussion from mentoring sessions are not shared with other staff or administration. Classroom 
observation notes made by the mentor become the sole property of the mentee following reflective 
conferences. 
Feedback The mentor engages in observing the mentee’s classroom on several occasions. The mentor provides positive 
peer coaching feedback that is specific and evidence based in a timely manner. The feedback is designed to 
increase the ment ee’s teaching skills by reinforcing “Best Practices” that are obse rved. Feedback also 
includes reflective questions centered on areas for improvement. 
282
 
45 
Encouragement The mentor encourages the mentee to try new things, expand his or her teaching skills and become actively 
involved with students, parents and staff. The men tor models a positive attitude toward the school, the 
District and the community at large. The encouragement to succeed is genuine. 
Knowledge of 
Content 
The mentor demonstrates an in depth understanding of content pedagogy and student standards. The mentor 
actively interprets how the content can be put into practice in the classroom using effective pedagogy for all 
students. 
Technology The mentor frequently utilizes information -age learning and technology to enhance the mentoring 
experience. 
Managing Student 
Learning 
The mentor can effectively manage and monitor student learning for ALL students, can systematically 
organize lessons and frequently offers assistance. 
 
J.    Mentoring Sessions. 
 
1. Mentoring will occur in a variety of formal and informal settings. 
 
2. Mentors and the mentees will create a schedule of formal mentoring sessions. At a 
minimum, monthly individual mentoring sessions should be schedule d. Time should 
be set aside for these more formal sessions. Formal mentoring time can be scheduled  
before or after school. Mentors and mentees can also decide to meet on the weekend 
or in the evening. 
 
3. Mentors can and should meet with the mentee on an informal basis to review lessons, 
talk about problems that have just arisen, etc. These conversations will often take place 
in the hall, at the copy machine, during lunch, etc. 
 
4. Upon request, mentors shall be provided with release time to conduct two (2) 
classroom observations of his/her mentee. This time shall be mutually scheduled by 
the mentor, mentee and building principal based upon the availability of guest teacher 
coverage or other suitable coverage for the mentor’s classroom/assignment. Any 
additional release time for the mentor and/or release time for the mentee is subject to 
approval by the building principal. 
 
5. Mentors and mentees can earn up to fifteen ( 15) hours of professional development 
for the mentoring activity. 
 
6. Generic mentoring sessions shall be created for 1
st and 2nd semester on the District’s 
professional development tracking system. T hese sessions shall appear on the 
professional development calendar on January 15 and May 15 of the given school year. 
Each of these generic mentoring sessions is for seven and one -half (7 ½) hours of 
professional development credit. Mentors and mentees shall register for these generic 
sessions instead of submitting special requests.  
 
K. Mentor payment will be validated based on the mentoring log that is submitted by the 
mentor on or before June 1
st. 
 
L. The provisions within this Article may be altered upon mutual agreement by both parties. 
 
ARTICLE 26.  INSURANCE 
26.1 
 A. The District shall maintain compliance with the Publicly Funded Health Insurance 
Contribution Act (PA 152 of 2011) and employee payroll deductions are authorized as 
necessary for this purpose.  During the term of this agreement, the District shall pay the 
annual maximum amount allowable by PA 152 toward the total cost of the medical and 
prescription premiums for the plans offered (or the maximum contribution allowed by 
any contractual restrictions outlined in this agreement).  The Board and the Association 
283
 
46 
agree to convene annually to review plan coverage offerings and employee premium 
contribution amounts consistent with PA 152.   
 
Teachers are responsible for paying the difference, which shall  be deducted evenly 
through pre-tax payroll deductions.  Deductions shall be made over 210  pays, beginning 
with the first pay of the school year.second pay in September of each school year, provided 
that the 20th payroll deduction is made prior to the end of the respective school year.  If 
the 20th payroll deduction is scheduled to take place after the completion of the school 
year, payroll deductions will begin with the first payment in September. 
 
MESSA PAK A is a benefit program which combines medical, dental, vision, life and 
long-term disability insurances listed in Article 2 6.1 into two plans, with MESSA as the 
administrator/carrier.  It is understood that if a husband and wife are both employed as 
teachers by the District, they and their dep endents shall only be covered by one D istrict-
paid MESSA PAK A insurance plan (i.e., the district shall only pay  the annual amount 
indicated above for the appropriate level of coverage – single, two person or family one 
time.)  
 
At any point, the Association may elect to move to a different level of MESSA deductible, 
co-pay, and/or prescription drug card.  If a change to the plan is to be made, the 
Association shall notify the District in writing, and the change shall take effect on the first 
of the month, plus 30 days following the request.  EXAMPLE: On May 14
th, the 
Association notifies the District in writing that a plan change is desired.  The new plan 
would take effect on July 1
st. 
 
Teachers shall be allowed to increase their flexible spending plan amounts under the 
District’s current IRS Section 125 cafeteria plan in accordance with applicable law, where 
possible.  Furthermore, the Plan B and/or Cafeteria Plan cash payment shall only be 
available to that spouse who is currently receiving the cash stipen d as of December 12, 
2008 (i.e. such teachers are grandfathered). 
 
 Plan A 
 
 Medical: A teacher choosing Pak A shall be enrolled in either MESSA Choices II , 
$500/$1000 in network, out of network $1000/$2000, OV/UC/ER 
$20/$25/$50; Saver RX;  MESSA ABC 1, or MESSA ABC 2 The mutually 
agreed upon MESSA health insurance plans found on the Employee Services 
Intranet and District Transparency Report.  .  This medical insurance shall be 
provided for the employee, spouse, and/or eligible dependents.  
 Life: Two times the teacher's salary with double indemnity in the event of accidental 
death (except due to drugs, alcohol, suicide and warfare as covered in most 
policies) and dismemberment schedule.  Teachers hired on or after June 4, 
1991 shall only be eligible for life insurance in the amount of $50,000 AD/D 
(except due to drugs, alcohol, suicide and warfare as covered in most policies). 
  Teachers leaving will be notified of conversion policies. 
 Dental: Delta Dental Insurance:  The full family plan shall be a true group with internal 
and external coordination of benefits.  For teachers who are not covered by 
another dental insurance equal to or greater than Delta Dental Plan C-01, those 
persons shall be enrolled in Delta Dental Auto Plus 008.  Those pe rsons 
covered by another dental plan equal to or greater than Delta C -01 shall be 
enrolled in Delta C-03. 
284
 
47 
 Vision: VSP III:  Full Family; true group with internal and external coordination of 
benefits. 
 Long-Term Disability:  
  Long term disability income insurance to cover all regular contracted full-time 
and half-time employees under the age of seventy (70) after the first sixty (60) 
calendar days of any illness or disability.  Such insurance shall pay up to two-
thirds (2/3) of his/her regular salary and r educed by any amounts paid or 
payable under Worker's Compensation, Social Security, or any school 
sponsored pension plan.  The remuneration under this article is as established 
under the company's policy and is paid at the daily rate of seven (7) days per 
week, fifty-two (52) weeks per year of one/three hundred sixty-fifth (1/365)of 
the annual salary of the employee.  This remuneration is paid for up to age 
seventy (70) for both accident and illness .  Currently, MESSA waives 
insurance premiums for the first twenty-four (24) months a teacher is drawing 
long-term disability insurance benefits.  The parties agree that if MESSA 
changes their current practice to adversely affect a teacher who is drawing 
long-term disability insurance, the Board shall provide for all insurances 
without cost to the teacher who is on long -term disability through August 31 
of the school year the teacher goes on disability.   
OR 
 
 Plan B (for employees who do not choose Plan A, do not receive Plan A benefits or other 
Board-provided medical insurance coverage through his/her s pouse (except for those 
teachers hired and married to another district employee prior to December 31, 2008).  This 
provision shall not restrict any teacher from receiving District-provided Plan B insurance 
coverage currently provided by MESSA PAK B at the benefit levels indicated in this  
provision.   
 
 Life:  Same as Plan A (teacher only). 
 Dental:  Same as Plan A (full family). 
 Vision:  Same as Plan A (full family). 
 Long Term Disability: Same as Plan A (teacher only). 
 Cash Payment:  Teachers shall receive a cash payment of $1,000 annually.  If forty -five 
(45) or more teachers elect not to receive district provided medical insurance coverage , 
then the rate of payment shall be $2,250 annually.  This amount shall be paid in two equal 
payments, the first in the second payroll in January and the second payment in the second 
payroll in June. 
 
OR 
   
  
B. This Section 26.1 is subject to the following:  MESSA PAK insurance is available only 
for the term of the Agreement and is an open issue for collective bargaining on the 
expiration of this Agreement.  Further, if after the expiration of one year of MESSA PAK 
insurance the Board is able to demonstrate that it could furnish comparable long term 
disability and life insurance for the ensuing years at a lesser cost than MESSA PAK then 
it will be permitted to purchase such insurance for comparable benefits from another 
carrier and have the program revert to MESSA Choices II. Any issue relative to whether 
MESSA PAK insurance is of lesser cost than some other carrier can provide is subject to 
arbitration in the event of disagreement, and the parties shall have full discovery consonant 
with the Michigan Court Rules relative to the costs of MESSA PAK insurance. The TEA's 
285
 
48 
only obligation in obtaining such information shall be to request such information in 
writing from MESSA, a copy of which shall be provided to the District. 
   
  EXAMPLE: 
The Board may bid life and LTD insurances under the same terms and conditions that 
existed under the 2011 -2013 contract.  If the total premium amount to provide such life 
and LTD coverages to teachers, when added to the published MESSA Choices II 
SuperCare1 Revised, MESSA Dental and MESSA Vision* premiums (at the rates 
currently in effect when the Board bids the life and LTD insurances) would be less than 
the District's total premiums paid for MESSA PAK, then the District shall no longer be 
obligated to provide insurance coverages through MESSA PAK.  If this occurs, the 
District shall provide the insurance coverages and carriers specified in the 2011- 2013 
contract, with the exception that it shall provide MESSA Choices II  
 
26.2 All of the insurances shall be Board paid for twelve (12) months for each teacher who 
completes his/her contractual obligation, and on a pro -rated basis if less than his/her contractual 
obligation is completed, except as stated in the following paragraphs. 
 
A. Any teacher who commences an unpaid leave of absence on or after April 1, which shall 
continue for the remainder of the school year, shall have his/her fringe benefits paid by 
the Board through August 31 of the calendar year in which the leave commenced. 
 
B. Should April 1 not be a scheduled work day, an unpaid leave which commences at the end 
of the last scheduled work day for purposes of this Agreement will be considered to have 
commenced on April 1. 
 
C. For employees who go on leaves, the Board will sponsor direct -pay coverage by the 
teacher at group rates to the extent the insurance company will allow, up to a maximum 
of twelve (12) months.  This provision applies only to health insurance coverage.  Other 
coverages cease at the end of the month in which the leave begins. 
 
D. The Board shall provide all insurances to a teacher who retires (after April 1) through June 
30th of the year in which he/she retires.  The retiring teacher shall be reimbursed for 
MPSERS insurance premium co -pay amounts for July and August of the year in which 
he/she retires. 
 
26.3 Worker's Compensation.  Any employee who is injured in the line of duty shall receive such 
compensation and expenses as prescribed by the Worker's Compensation Law of the State plus any 
other benefits from Social Security or public sources.  Such compensation shall be supplemented with 
an amount sufficient to maintain his/her regular pay for a period not to exceed sixty (60) calendar 
days, without deduction of his/her accumulated sick leave. 
 
ARTICLE 27.  SALARY SCHEDULE APPLICATION 
 
27.1 Professional Growth.  Professional growth salary adjustments shall be paid as follows: 
Effective after the start of the 2009 -2010 school year, a teacher shall only be allowed to advance to 
BA+20, MA, MA+30/EDS, PHD/EDD.  However, teachers currently on eliminated lanes MA+10 
and MA+20 and current teachers that have successfully completed classes for MA+10 and MA+20 
before the start of the 2009- 10 school year, will be grandfathered in accordance with the September 
deadline in Article  27 G.  Teachers  on eliminated lanes as of June 30, 1997, i.e. BA+15, BA+25, 
MA+5, MA+15 and MA+25, and BA+30 as of December 14, 1971, have been red- circled and shall 
not be forced to move to another lane during the term of this contract.  Only teachers hired on or 
286
 
49 
before December 14, 1971, are allowed to advance to BA+30.  Courses applicable for professional 
growth shall be those acceptable to: 
 
 A. an accredited (North Central or regional equivalent) college or university's own 
undergraduate or graduate degree program . according to the following:   All coursework 
must be submitted to the District on the institution ’s official transcript  according to the 
following: 
 
  1. graduate level (post baccalaureate) classes 
 
  2. third and fourth year baccalaureate level classes;ORBA level classes that will lead to 
an additional endorsement  must be pre -approved by the  Assistant Superintendent or 
Director of Employee Services. 
 
3.  first and second year baccalaureate level classes within the subject area of the teacher's 
major(s) or minor(s). 
 
 
B.  Courses successfully completed by a teacher through an intermediary/third party (ex. 
Learner’s Edge, RLS, Canter, etc.) will no longer be accepted by the District for 
advancement on the salary schedule.   A teacher may receive up to ten (10)  credit hours 
towards advancement on the salary schedule through an intermediary/third party (ex. 
Learners Edge, PLS, Canter, etc.) provided the course is acceptable for credit by an 
accredited college or university’s own undergraduate or graduate degree program.  
 
C. In the event a teacher desires to begin work on an additional major or minor, a written 
request to the Deputy Superintendent for Instruction, K -12 must be received and 
approved. 
 
D. The intent of 27.1 (A) includes, in part, that if the institution of higher education as 
described in 27.1 (A) does not indicate that the course(s) taken by the teacher fit 27.1 (A) 
(1), (2), or (3), then the teacher is responsible to contact the institution of higher education 
in question and have further documentation sent to the Assistant Superintendent, 
Employee Services which clarifies into which category(ies) the class (es) apply. 
  
Should the institution of higher education fail to comply with the teacher’s request, the 
courses taken at the time shall not be credited as professional growth classes under Article 
27 of the Master Agreement. 
 
E. Teachers involved in professional growth classes are not required to seek permission or 
submit documents for prior approval from the school district or its agents [except as found 
in 27.1 (C)] to take professional growth classes. 
 
 B. For classes successfully completed by the first day of the school year and recorded in the 
Board office by the last Friday in September, payment shall start on the second (2nd) pay 
Friday in October. 
   
  In the event that evidence of course completion is not on record by the fourth Friday of 
September, but is received by February 15th, then payment shall be postponed until the 
spring adjustment period. 
 
  In either event all monies shall be retroactive to the first day of school. 
 
287
 
50 
 C. For classes successfully completed by the first day of the spring semester and recorded in 
the Board office by February 15th, payment shall begin on the second pay Friday in March. 
 
  In the event that evidence of course completion is not recorded by February 15th, but is 
received by June first, then payment shall be postponed until the last pay in June. 
 
  In either event all monies shall be retroactive to the first day of the spring semester.  
Payment shall be one-half the yearly professional growth rate. 
 
27.2 Rules for Applying Schedules 
 
 A. Credit for outside experience shall be applied to all new hires uniformly consistent with 
administrative procedures.  If the procedures currently in effect are to be changed, the 
TEA is to be notified, in writing, of the new procedures prior to March first of the school 
year preceding the effective date of the change. 
 
 B. Credit for partial years of teaching will be given to the nearest full or half step according 
to the following formula: 
 
  1. .1 and .2 to lower full step 
 
  2. .3, .4, .6 to one-half step 
 
  3. .7, .8, .9 to a higher full step 
 
27.3 Increments 
 
 A. The increment adjustment shall be made and reflected in the first paycheck in September. 
 
 B. The first  increment adjustment for longevity shall be made and reflected in the first 
paycheck of September or February based on the following dates of hire: 
 
  1. For persons hired no later than September 30, the anniversary date of hire shall be 
September 1 of that year. 
 
  2. For persons hired after October 1, but no later than April 1, the anniversary date of 
hire shall be February 1 of that year. 
 
  The above referenced dates of hire apply only to longevity payments and do not reference 
another issue in the master agreement (i.e., seniority). 
 
27.4 School Psychologists' and School Social Workers Rate of Pay (Applicable only to School 
Psychologists and School Social Workers hired before October 17, 2006). 
 
The Troy Education Association and the Troy School District understand and agree that teachers 
employed as school psychologists and school social workers shall be entitled to payment according 
to the MA+30 track of Schedule A in the Collective Bargaining Agreement providing that: 
 
 1. He/She has completed a master's degree plus thirty (30) semester hours: 
 2. The school psychologist has completed a master's degree in psychology and the 
master's program required at least sixty (60) semester hours of credit; and/or 
 3. The school social worker has completed a  master's degree in social work (MSW 
generally requires at least a sixty (60) semester hour program in social work). 
 
ARTICLE 28.   PROTECTION OF TEACHERS 
 
288
 
51 
28.1 Classroom Control.  The authority and effectiveness in the classroom shall be primarily the 
teacher's responsibility.  The Board and Administration will give reasonable support and assistance 
to teachers with respect to the maintenance of control and discipline in the classroom.  Whenever it 
appears that a particular pupil requires the attention of special counselors, social workers, alternative 
education placement, or law enforcement personnel, the teacher shall advise the principal in writing.  
Having been advised the principal will schedule a building team (teacher, social worker, principal, 
psychologist, etc.) meeting.  The meeting will be held without undue delay. 
 
28.2 Assault Charges.   Teachers shall observe such rules concerning punishment of students as 
may be established by the Board.  In the event civil proceedings are brought against a teacher alleging 
that he/she committed an assault in the course of this employment, he/she will be provided legal 
counsel by the Board. 
 
28.3 Injury.   For injury sustained on duty, see Article 26.3, Worker's Compensation, and Article 
26.1 A, Long Term Disability. 
 
28.4 Safety and Liability.  Teachers shall be expected to exercise reasonable care with respect to 
the safety of pupils and property, but shall not be individually liable to the Board for damage or loss 
to person or property except in the case of gross negligence. 
 
28.5 Legal Couns el.   Upon request of a teacher who is assaulted as a result of classroom or 
extracurricular duties, the Board will provide preliminary legal counsel, but not representation. 
 
28.6 Teachers are not required to enter a "bomb scare" building until the building has been declared 
safe by the police department. 
 
28.7 Working time lost by a teacher as a result of school -work connected assaults or charges of 
assault shall not result in loss of salary or leave time, unless the teacher is found guilty. 
 
28.8 A teacher shall be reimbursed for loss, damage or destruction of clothing or personal property 
as a result of theft, vandalism or assault related to teaching duties unless due to negligence or criminal 
guilt of the teacher, if such loss exceeds fifteen dollars ($ 15.00) and does not exceed one hundred 
dollars ($100.00).  The application shall be in the form of a letter within one school/work week of the 
damage, and shall be made before the end of the fiscal year (June 30). 
 
In all cases, adequate proof of loss or a sworn affidavit must be submitted with the claim.  In addition, 
a police report must be filed in all cases involving theft of personal property and damage to an 
automobile.  The Board or school administrators shall assist teachers in attempting to obtain 
restitution for damages or loss occurring on school premises during the time of employment. 
 
In the event there is a dispute involving a claim in this section, the matter shall be referred to the 
Professional Relations Committee for determination. 
 
ARTICLE 29.   SEVERANCE PAY AND RETIREMENT/RESIGNATION 
 
29.1 All tenure teachers with ten or more years of seniority in the Troy School District shall upon 
termination of employment from the Troy School s, receive severance pay in the amount of one half 
(1/2) of t he per diem rate of pay for unused sick days provided for in Article 1 8 to a maximum 
accumulation of sixty (60) days.  Thirty (30) additional unused sick days will be paid for at the current 
guest/substitute teacher pay rate to tenure teachers with ten or more years of seniority in the Troy 
School District.  All tenure teachers with less than ten years  of seniority in the Troy School District 
shall upon termination of employment from the Troy School District  receive severance pay in the 
amount of the current guest/substitute teacher pay rate for unused sick days provided for in Article 
289
 
52 
18 to a maximum accumulation of ninety (90) days.   Probationary teachers are not eligible for 
severance pay.  Severance pay shall be paid within two (2) pay periods of request for said severance 
pay.  Such request shall be made within twelve (12) months of termination.  Severance pay will not 
be paid in cases where proper notice of leaving was not given or where illegal or immoral or other 
unethical conduct by the employee is involved.  A teacher whose severance payment is five thousand 
dollars ($5,000.00) or more shall have said payment deposited into a 403 (b) offered through the 
District. 
 
29.2 All teachers who retire with ten (10) or more years of service in Troy shall, at their option, be 
paid severance pay as set forth below in lieu of pay for accumulated sick leave.  A teacher whose 
severance payment is five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or mo re shall have said payment deposited 
into a 403 (b) plan offered through the District   
 
  10-14 years’ service - $1,000.00 
  15-19 years’ service - $1,500.00 
  20 or more years - $100.00/per year 
 
29.3 In case of death during a teacher's employment, the teacher's beneficiary on his/her retirement 
card shall receive either severance pay under 2 9.1 or severance pay in lieu of pay for accumulated 
sick leave under 28.2, whichever is greater, but not both. 
 
29.4 Mid-Year Notice Requirement.  A teacher resigning  or retiring must give a  minimum of 
ninety (90) days’ notice  in order to be eligible for severance, except in extenuating  circumstances 
including, but not limited to, death of a family member, spousal job transfer/relocation, and other 
family crisis. Teach ers providing less than the 90- workday notice, but more than 30- days’ notice, 
shall receive a prorated severance payment; i.e., a teacher giving 89-days’ notice shall be eligible for 
89/90ths of the severance benefit.  Teachers giving less than 30 -days’ notice shall not be entitled to 
any severance benefit, assuming there are no extenuating circumstances.  A written notice should be 
sent to the Assistant Superintendent, Human ResourcesEmployee Services. 
 
29.5 End-of-Year Notice Requirement.  Teachers resign ing or retiring prior to the start of the 
next school year must give notice by March 30 th (90 days prior to the end of the preceding school 
year).  Teachers providing less than the 90- workday notice, but more than 30- days’ notice, shall 
receive a prorated severance payment; i.e., a teacher giving 89- days’ notice  shall be eligible for 
89/90ths of the severance benefit.  Teachers giving less than 30 -days’ notice shall not be entitled to 
any severance benefit, assuming there are no extenuating circumstances.  A written notice should be 
sent to the Assistant Superintendent, Human ResourcesEmployee Services. 
 
 
ARTICLE 30.   MASTER SICK BANK 
 
30.1 Master Sick Bank Plan.   The procedure for the administration of the Master Sick Bank shall 
be in accordance with the following provisions and shall be for the use and benefit of all eligible 
teachers who apply and whose applications are subsequently approved for sick day(s) benefits. 
 
30.2 Funding of Sick Bank.   The Master Sick Bank shall be funded in accordance with the 
following provisions: 
 
 A. Teachers newly employed by the School District shall have one sick day of their advance 
current allowance transferred to the Master Sick Bank at the beginning of their 
employment. 
 
290
 
53 
 B. The maximum number of sick days in the Master Sick Bank shall be twice the number of 
teachers in the bargaining unit. 
 
 C. The above one sick day transferred to the Master Sick Bank from the current allowance of 
a teacher, or any other sick days so transferred, shall not be deducted from the days 
remaining in the Master Sick Bank at the time a teacher terminates his/her employment 
with the School District. 
 
 D. If the number of days in the Master Sick Bank falls below 25 percent of the maximum 
funding of days prior to the end of any school year, the TEA will notify the Board to make 
a transfer of one (1) more day from each teacher's current allowance to the Master Sick 
Bank. 
 
30.3 Eligibility - Master Sick Bank.   Any teacher shall be eligible to make application to the Sick 
Bank Committee for sick days of benefit after he/she has been incapacitated for at least fifteen (15) 
consecutive working days and has used all of his/her own allowance.  If a teacher is incapacitated for 
at least fifteen (15) working days (not necessarily consecutive working days) in any one (1) year and 
there is a further incapacitation which appears to be a recurrence of the same illness or accident and 
the same doctor who handled the case originally verified by written statement that such incapacitation 
is a recurrence, then t he fifteen (15) consecutive day eligibility requirement could be waived in this 
instance at the discretion of the Sick Bank Committee. 
 
30.4 Application.   Each application for sick days of benefit from the Master Sick Bank must be 
submitted on the Sick Bank Application form to the Sick Bank Committee, and such application will 
be approved or rejected on the basis of the individual teacher's circumstances.  All applications must 
be accompanied by supporting doctor's statements. 
 
30.5 Sick Bank Committee.   The Sick Bank committee shall be composed of three (3) teachers 
to be selected in any manner determined by the TEA and two (2) administrators to be selected by the 
Board.  They shall hold membership on the committee for such terms as the TEA may determine.   
Any application approval by the Committee shall be by a majority vote of the entire Committee. 
 
30.6 Administration.   The Master Sick Bank shall be administered by the Sick Bank Committee 
in accordance with the following provisions: 
 
A. No teacher shall be  allowed more than the number of days needed to satisfy the waiting 
period for LTD benefit from the Sick Bank in any school year. 
 
B. The form authorizing an award of sick days from the Master Sick Bank to a teacher which 
is sent to the Board for payment must  be accompanied by supporting doctor statements 
used by the Committee in making their decision (for Board review) and signed by three 
(3) members of the Sick Bank Committee and  one of the following: 
 
1. President of the Troy Education Association 
 
2. Executive Director of the Troy Education Association 
 
  Said forms shall be sent to the Board within five (5) days of authorization. 
 
 C. The records of the Master Sick Bank shall be audited at the end of each school year by a 
committee composed of three (3) members, with one member each to be appointed by the 
Board, by the TEA, and by the Sick Bank Committee.  A copy of the audit report shall be 
furnished to the Board, TEA and Sick Bank Committee. 
 
291
 
54 
30.7 Board Retention of Sick Days.   All sick leave days a ccumulated by any teacher in his/her 
current allowance or those days transferred to the Master Sick Bank from his/her current allowance 
shall be subject only to the contingent liability of actual sick claim use by the teacher or the Master 
Sick Bank.  All sick leave days which are not used by the teacher or the Master Sick Bank during the 
period of his/her employment shall not be subject to any other type or kind of claim in any form 
whatsoever by the teacher or the TEA when his/her employment has terminated. 
 
30.8 Sick Bank.   The Board recognizes that the Sick Bank Committee's decisions cannot be 
reversed by the Board.   
 
ARTICLE 31.  ANNEXATION AND CONSOLIDATION 
 
In the event that the Troy School District is forcibly or voluntarily annexed or consolidated  through 
action taken by the courts, the State of Michigan, State Board of Education, Intermediate School 
District to or with another district(s), teachers of the Troy School District shall retain seniority rights 
and their tenure status or probationary st atus that would have been afforded had no annexation or 
consolidation taken place. 
 
Annexation or consolidation through action taken by courts, the State of Michigan, State Board of 
Education, Intermediate School District, or electorate shall not cause a teacher to lose or reduce leave 
rights, salary, salary status, fringe benefits, employment, or other rights provided for in this 
Agreement. 
 
 
ARTICLE 32.  DISTRICT ORGANIZATION 
 
32.1 Departments 
 
 A. The assignment of each teacher shall be consistent with primary teacher responsibility.   
ESL teachers shall be assigned to a department within their building based on certification. 
 
 B. Every teacher in each high school shall be assigned by the building administration to a 
department headed by a department chairperson within that building as listed below: 
 
1. Math 
2. Social Studies 
3. Science 
4. English/Library/Media/Speech 
5. Business 
6. Physical Education 
7. Counselors 
8. Vocational Education:  Industrial Arts,  
        Vocational Education, Home Economics 
9. Foreign Language 
10. Special Education 
11. Fine Arts:  Arts, Music (Vocal and  
        Instrumental), Drama 
 
C. Every teacher in each middle school shall be assigned by the building administrator to a 
department headed by a department chairperson within that building as listed below: 
 
1. Math 
2. Science 
3. Social Studies 
4. English/Library/Media/Reading/Speech 
 
 D. Every teacher eligible for district -wide departments shall be assigned by the 
Administration to a department headed by a department chairperson (*Special Education 
shall have two department heads). 
 
  Department Heads for middle school level district-wide shall be: 
 
1. Foreign Language 
2. Home Living 
3. Special Education/Resource 
Room (*2) 
4. Business 
6. Physical Education 
7. Industrial Arts Education and Vocational 
Education 
8. Fine Arts: Music (Vocal & Instrumental), 
Drama, Art 
292
 
55 
5. Counselors 
 
 E. Department heads for elementary level district-wide shall be: 
 
1. Special Education (Learning Disabilities) 
2. Fine Arts (Art/Music) 
3. Physical Education 
4. Special Education/Categorical Program Teachers  (Pre-Primary Speech and Language 
Development, Pre- Primary Development, Emotionally Impaired, Educable Mentally 
Impaired, Trainable Mental ImpairedEarly Childhood Program, Emotionally Impaired, Mild 
Cognitive Impairment, Moderate Cognitive Impairment, Autism Spectrum Disorder ) 
 
 F. One (1) district level department head for itinerant staff (Social Workers, Psychologists, 
Speech Pathologists, Learning Disabilities Teacher Consultants.) 
  
 G. One (1) district level department head for media staff. 
 
32.2 Department Head Qualifications 
 
A. Must be a tenure teacher or, in the case of non-certificated personnel, must have completed 
a probationary period equivalent to the probationary period prescribed by the Tenure Act 
for certificated teachers, unless there are none available. 
 
B. Must be a teacher within the department headed. 
 
C. Shall have taught the previous year within the department headed, except in new buildings 
or a reorganized school. 
 
D. Should have a major or minor in one of the areas of the department unless there are no 
teachers with said major or minor available. 
 
E. Qualifications for special education itinerant department head: 
 
  1. An individual possessing a teaching certificate must have completed his/her 
probationary period at the time of selection to the department head position. 
 
  2. An individual who does not possess a teaching certificate must have completed a 
probationary period equivalent to the probationary period prescribed by the Tenure 
Act for certified teachers. 
 
32.3 Department Head Selection 
 
 A. The department heads shall be elected by secret ballot of the eligible department members 
during the last ten (10) days of the teachers' school year.  The term of office shall be two 
(2) years.  To elect, all department members must be notified at least three (3) days prior 
to the election itself.  It shall require a majority of those eligible to vote to be elected. 
 
 B. If during the school year a vacancy occurs in the position, the same election procedure 
shall be applied to elect a department head to finish the unexpired term. 
 
 C. A new election may be called by a majority of the eligible department members by a 
signed petition.  Should an election take place, it shall be held within five (5) school days. 
 
 D. The same election procedure shall be applied to elect a department head to finish the 
unexpired term. 
 
32.4 Department Head Duties 
 
293
 
56 
 A. Shall be a member of the building curriculum committee if such a committee does exist. 
 
 B. Shall hold regular meetings with the members of the department to keep them informed 
on matters of concern to them. 
 
 C. Shall assist new teachers in becoming familiar with the school and the department and 
their particular responsibilities. 
 
 D. Shall be responsible for the supervision and coordination of the curriculum of the 
department to include coordination of textbook selection. 
 
 E. Shall serve as a liaison between the individuals of the department and the administration 
when necessary. 
 
 F. Shall forward requisitions and requests from within the department to the building  
principal. 
 
 G. Shall perform such other miscellaneous duties that are requested by the members of the 
department and the administration that may be deemed reasonable and proper. 
 
 H. Shall serve as a member of the Secondary Curriculum Committee if such a  committee 
exists.  Elementary department heads shall serve as a member of any curriculum 
committee relating to their department if such a committee exists. 
 
 I. Each department shall hold regular departmental meetings as frequently as is necessary to 
keep its members informed of matters of mutual concern and to maintain the orderly 
operation of the department.  Such meetings will be scheduled by the department head at 
such times as are mutually agreeable to as many members of the department as possible.  
All department members shall normally be expected to attend such meetings.  When a 
member cannot attend the meeting, the member shall notify the chairperson in advance. 
 
 J. Schedule for itinerant staff (art, music, physical education) shall be prepared by their 
department heads subject to the approval of the administrator in charge of the area of 
instruction. 
 
 K. Any committee work directly related to the responsibilities of the department head listed 
above will not count as a committee assignment under Article 6, Section 6.2B. 
 
32.5    Release Time.  Each department head shall have release time dependent on the number of 
department members.  A department head with nine (9) or fewer members in his/her department shall 
be provided up to nine (9) half days pe r year.  A department head with ten (10) or more in the 
department shall be provided up to fourteen (14) half days per year.  The department head shall notify 
the principal in advance those days he/she wishes to utilize.  The department shall notify the sub caller 
for release days. 
 
32.6 Head Teacher, Elementary 
 
 A. Qualification for Head Teacher. An applicant for the head teacher position must have an 
elementary permanent, provisional or professional certificate with at least three (3) years 
teaching experience at the elementary level. 
 
 B. The position of head teacher shall be reopened every two years.  All applicants will be 
interviewed by the building principal.  Following these interviews, the building principal 
will appoint a head teacher whom he/she feels best meets the needs of the building. 
 
 C. Suggested Duties: 
 
294
 
57 
  1. The head teacher shall be in charge of the building during the absence of the 
principal. 
 
  2. The head teacher shall make decisions within the scope of the normal procedures 
and policies set for the building by the principal and Central Office. 
 
  3. The head teacher's workday shall begin thirty (30) minutes before the entry of the 
children, and end thirty (30) minutes after the close of school.   
 
  4.    The head teacher shall assist the principal with the discipline problems of the 
building.  He/she shall handle minor discipline problems within the building and all 
discipline problems when the principal is unavailable. 
 
  5. The head teacher will be responsible for preparing and keeping up to date all teacher 
duty schedules.  He/she shall keep the principal informed of same. 
 
  6. The head teacher will be responsible for correct procedures regarding arrival and 
departure of children and buses. 
 
  7. The head teacher shall be responsible for noon hour supervision.  Noon aides will be 
instructed to go to the head teacher with problems. 
 
  8. The head teacher shall have the responsibility of seeing that all accident forms are 
properly filled out. 
 
  9. The head teacher shall inform the principal of the general tone of the building, and 
report any areas of concern by the staff. 
 
  10. During inclement or extremely cold weather when students come into the building 
before the start of school the head teacher may be put on duty to handle  these 
children. 
 
  11. The head teacher shall acquaint himself/herself with the coordination of all services 
to the school. 
 
  12. The head teacher shall be provided an opportunity to gain administrative experience 
in the following areas:  (a) pupil records; (b) requisitions; (c) referrals; (d) proposals 
to Central Office; and (e) conduct some faculty meetings. 
 
  13. Since all of these listed duties cannot be handled at the same time by any one head 
teacher, it is the responsibility of the building princi pal to decide what duties shall 
be under the direction of the head teacher. 
 
32.7 Schedules B, C and D. 
 
A. When known, the Board shall publish and post in each school a list of all positions which 
will be filled, and paid for at the scheduled rates, for the school year.  If during the year 
they plan to fill any additional positions, the TEA will be notified, and the notification 
placed also in each school.  No employee of the District will be asked to volunteer for 
any position not included in Schedules B, C or D.  All new or recently vacated schedule 
C clubs shall be posted. 
 
B. Contracts shall be issued for extra -curricular sponsorships prior to the start of the 
season/activity.  A teacher who takes an extra duty position and wishes to resign shall 
give at least two (2) weeks' written notice to his/her principal.  Salary for the position will 
be prorated. 
295
 
58 
 
C. If during the year a teacher wishes to organize and/or sponsor a club or activity not 
previously listed on Schedules B, C or D, the teacher must obtain administrative approval 
in writing by the Administration, and such administrator shall be responsible for the 
proper management process for achieving club or activity status.  The placement of the 
club or activity on the appropriate schedule shall cause the Boar d and TEA to negotiate 
a rate of compensation within thirty (30) days after approval by the Administration. 
 
32.825.12 Evaluation of Schedules B, C and D Positions.   If positions as set forth in Schedules 
B, C and D are to be evaluated, it shall be done with the full knowledge of the person being evaluated 
by his/her administrative supervisor.  If the Board makes any changes in the current instruments or 
adds new instruments, the TEA shall be so notified before the instrument becomes operational.  The 
TEA shall be provided a copy of all current evaluation instruments. 
 
 
ARTICLE 33.  RETIREMENT 
 
33.1 Mandatory retirement, if any, shall comply with applicable federal law.  
   
33.2 A person must be employed by the Troy School District on the last working day prior to date 
of retirement.  (Also see Article 29.  Severance Pay and Retirement/Resignation.) 
 
ARTICLE 34.   SHARED TEACHING 
 
34.1 Teachers may volunteer for shared -time assignments by making application to the Assistant 
Superintendent, Human ResourcesEmployee Services on or before March 1 for the ensuing school 
year.  Teachers requesting and being granted shared-time assignments shall be notified at least thirty- 
(30-) calendar days before the assignment begins. 
 
34.2 No shared-time assignments shall come into existence without approval of the Superintendent 
or his/her designee.  Once approved by the Superintendent or his/her designee, a shared- time 
assignment shall not terminate during the school year without the approval of the Superintendent or 
his/her designee, except in case of resignation or termination of one or both of the teachers sharing 
the assignment.  In case of such resignation or termination, the Superintendent or his/her designee 
shall have the right, in his/her discretion, to continue the shared-time assignment. 
 
34.3 A shared -time assignment may be continued for an additional school year by agreement 
between the teachers involved and the superintendent or his/her designee.  
 
34.4 The termination of shared- time assignments by the Superinten dent or his/her designee shall 
not be considered an involuntary transfer. 
 
34.5 Compensation 
 
 A. Shared time teachers shall be compensated in proration of the salary they would be entitled 
to if they held a full-time assignment. 
 
 B. Shared time teachers shall have the following fringe benefit options.  In no case shall the 
total cost of the fringe benefits between teachers sharing a position exceed the total cost 
of the benefits paid to a full-time teacher for the same position. 
 
  1. Life insurance as provided in Article 26.1. 
 
296
 
59 
  2. Health: The mutually agreed upon MESSA health insurance plans found on the 
Employee Services Intranet and District Transparency Report.  This medical insurance 
shall be provided for the employee, spouse, and/or eligible depe ndents.  (MESSA 
Choices II, $500/$1000 in network, out of network $1000/$2000, OV/UC/ER 
$20/$25/$50; Saver RX; MESSA ABC 1, or MESSA ABC 2), dental, and vision 
insurance.  The Board shall pay the same proration of the premium paid for salary for 
these insurances as provided in Article 26.1, and the teacher shall pay the remaining 
portion of the premium.  Except in instances where the insurance will be a true group, 
a teacher at his/her option may use the dollar value of the Board's share of the premium 
cost to be applied to the purchase of any combination of health, dental and/or vision 
insurance, with the teacher to pay any remaining portion of the premium for the desired 
coverage. 
 
  3. Worker's Compensation as provided in Article 26.3. 
 
  4. Long term disability insurance as provided in Article 26.1. 
 
  5. Fringe benefits delineated in this Article are subject to the terms and approval of the 
insurance carrier. 
 
34.6 Shared-time teachers will divide preparation/planning time, but their total 
preparation/planning time will not exceed the preparation/planning time of a full -time teacher.  The 
number of preparations at secondary shall be no more than two per day for less than a full-day teacher 
unless the teacher requests or accepts more.  The duty time for sh ared-time teachers when added to 
the duty time of their shared-time partner, where appropriate, shall equal a full-time assignment. 
 
Shared-time teachers will be required to attend staff meetings, if the staff meeting is immediately 
preceding or following his/her schedule.  If the staff meeting does not immediately precede or follow 
the teacher's schedule, the teacher shall attend the make -up meeting.  If no make -up meeting is 
scheduled, the teacher is responsible for obtaining the faculty meeting informati on.  Shared -time 
teachers shall also attend all parent conferences, open houses and serve on committees as provided 
for full-time teachers.  No extra compensation shall be paid for the fulfillment of these duties. 
 
34.7 Shared time teachers will be allowed  to share time by teaching one semester and having the 
shared-time partner teach the other semester.  A teacher who is to teach the second semester must pay 
for fringe benefits prior to the commencement of the first semester if the teacher wishes to have 
coverage. 
 
34.8 For purposes of this Agreement, a teacher who has voluntarily become a less than full -time 
employee shall be considered shared-time.  
 
34.9 Seniority.  Each teacher participating in shared-time will receive full seniority credit. 
 
34.10 Sick Leave Days. 
 
 A. Teachers in a shared-time position shall receive prorated sick leave days. 
 B. Absences shall be deducted on a prorated basis. 
 
34.11 Shared-time teachers who do not teach daily shall fulfill the following workday obligations: 
 
 Full-time Equivalency 180 Student Days 6 Teacher Workdays  
  1.0 180  6.0 
  .9    163    5.0 
  .8  145  4.5 
297
 
60 
  .7  127  4.0 
  .6  109  3.5 
  .5 91  3.0 
  .4 72  2.0 
  .3 54  1.5 
  .2 36  1.0 
  .1 18  0.5 
 
 
Article 35.  NILES COMMUNITY HIGH SCHOOL 
 
Collective Bargaining Agreement Application 
The following articles and schedules contained in this collective bargaining agreement shall apply in 
their entirety to the Niles Community High School teachers: 
 
Article 1. Recognition    Article 23. Grievance Procedure 
Article 2. TEA Rights    Article 24. Negotiation Procedures 
Article 3. Teacher Rights   Article 25. Miscellaneous Provisions 
Article 4. Evaluation*    Article 26. Insurance 
Article 7 Rights of Administration  Article 27. Salary Schedule Application 
Article 8. Joint Responsibilities   Article 28. Protection of Teachers 
Article 9. Health and Safety   Article 29. Severance Pay and Retirement 
Article 18. Leave Pay    Article 30. Master Sick Bank 
Article 19. Maternity, Childcare and  Article 31. Annexation and Consolidation 
  Adoption Leave   Article 32. District Organization 
Article 20. Leaves of Absence-General  Article 33 Retirement 
Article 21. Sabbatical Leave   Article 34.* Shared Teaching 
Article 22. Lines of Communication  Article 36. Ancillary Staff  
       Article 37. Duration of Agreement 
       Schedules  A, B, C and D.  
 
All references exclusively for Niles Community High School are contained in Article 3 5.  Article 
35.10 Professional Qualifications and Assignments compares to Article 10 Professional 
Qualifications and Assignments in the main collective bargaining agreement; however, applicable 
parts of Article 3 5.10 applies to Niles Community High School while Article 10 applies to staff, 
schools and buildings other than Niles Community H igh School.  A number of 35.10.3 means that 
Article 10, Section 3 of the main collective bargaining agreement does not apply to Niles Community 
High School and its staff, whereas the terms and conditions in 35.10.3 do apply at Niles Community 
High School.  If a listing for 35.10.1 does not appear, it means that Article 10, Section 1 of the main 
collective bargaining agreement applies to staff at Niles Community High School. 
 
 
Article 35.1  Layoff*  
 
At the sole discretion of administration teachers may be g iven the opportunity to take a voluntary 
layoff. 
 
Article 35.2  Teacher Responsibilities 
 
A teacher may be required to serve on no more than two committees during the school year.  The 
length of service in each activity shall not exceed five months.  An activity lasting more than five 
months shall satisfy the requirement of serving on two committees during the school year.  Teachers 
may be requested to serve on district -wide, inter- and intraschool committees.  This section is not 
298
 
61 
intended to limit a teacher from voluntarily serving on any number of committees.  Assignment to a 
North Central committee shall count as one committee. 
 
Article 35.3  Professional Compensation 
 
35.3.1   School Calendar.  For purposes of teacher compensation, the calendar shall c onstitute 193 
days inclusive of the six (6) paid holidays .  To insure provision of the minimum number of days of 
student instruction as required by MCLA 388.1701, as amended from time to time, days of student 
instruction may be rescheduled and the necessary modifications to the school calendar will be made.  
If days of student instruction need to be rescheduled to be in compliance with law, the parties shall 
meet and mutually agree to a revised calendar. 
 
35.3.2   Article 11, Section 4.D of the main contract shall not apply to Niles Community High School. 
 
Article 35.4  Teaching Hours 
 
35.4.1 On days immediately preceding school holidays and vacations, the teachers' day shall end 
at the close of the pupils' school day, except that the teachers should remain in the building until the 
buses have left the school grounds.  On Fridays, unless it immediately precedes a school holiday or 
recess, teachers may leave six and one -half (6 ½) hours after the start of the student day.   Teachers 
involved in scheduled TEA meetings shall be excused at the end of the pupils' school day, except that 
this practice shall not apply to more than five (5) days when the entire TEA membership is involved. 
 
35.4.2   Lunch Period.  Teacher shall have a duty-free lunch period of 30 minutes, during which 
they may leave the building.   
 
Article 35.5  Class Size 
 
Teaching Loads and Assignments, Niles Community High School.  The maximum number of 
students per section, unless otherwise stated, shall not exceed twenty-five (25).   
 
35.5.1 The number of students in all lab classes shall not exceed the number of stations or twenty-
five (25), whichever is less.  Science classes requiring a lab and computer classes are considered 
laboratory classes. 
 
35.5.2 Physical education classes shall have a maximum of 33 (thirty-three) students. 
 
35.5.3 If necessary, the class size maximum may be exceeded by two students.  For the one or two 
students over the stated maximum, $80 per marking period shall be paid to the TEA scholarship fund 
for graduating high school students from the Troy School District. 
 
299
 
62 
Article 35.6  Teaching Conditions 
 
35.6.1 The total student contact time and preparation time shall be comparable to that of high 
school teachers in the main contract. 
 
35.6.2 Building Restructuring.  If at least 75% of the Niles Community High School teachers agree 
to a restructuring plan, the plan shall be implemented after receiving approval from the 
superintendent (or his/her designee) and the TEA. 
 
35.6.3 Vending machines shall be available. 
 
35.6.4 Niles Community High School staff may request additional office help at semester ends  to 
aid teachers.  Niles Community High School staff will arrange scheduling of this additional help as 
mutually agreed to by the principal, the staff of the building and the Human ResourcesEmployee 
Services. 
 
35.6.5 Adequate lunchroom/lounge facilities will be available for staff use.  There shall be lavatory 
facilities available and reserved for adult staff use. 
 
35.6.6 Telephone facilities shall be provided for teachers' use for school business and reasonable 
personal calls.  
 
35.6.7 Paved parking facilities shall be available for teachers’ use during school hours.  
 
35.6.8 Library Use.  Article 14, Section 12 of the main contract shall not apply for Niles 
Community High School. 
 
35.6.9  Teacher parking lot problems shall be reported to the administration for appropriate action. 
 
35.6.10 The counselor shall work up to two weeks (as determined by the administra tion) of the 
summer recess immediately preceding the start of the school year at his/her daily rate, unless notified 
to the contrary by the end of the preceding teacher work year. 
 
Article 35.7  Report Cards. 
 
A. Report cards or final grades shall not be routinely required to be completed and handed in 
earlier than the end of the second work day following the last day of the term as shown on 
the calendar.  It is recognized, however, that grades may be required for certain students 
earlier than the time lin es above, and the teachers agree to cooperate and submit grades 
earlier under these special circumstances (examples of special circumstances include 
student moving, scholarship and admission to college). 
 
B. Teachers shall have the authority to grade students and recommend whether a student shall 
be passed or retained.  Any person or committee who has authority to change or reverse a 
teacher's decision shall do so only after furnishing the teacher with written notification of 
their action.  The notification sh all include the name of the student and rationale for said 
change. 
 
C. Progress reports for students achieving less than an average or satisfactory grade are 
routinely required at the end of the middle week of every term unless otherwise agreed to 
by the parties. 
 
 
300
 
63 
Article 35.8  Seniority 
 
35.8.1  Article 17, Section 1 of the main contract shall apply in addition to the following: 
 
Niles Community High School teachers employed as of the effective date of this agreement will be 
given their actual date of hire as a teacher for Niles Community High School as a seniority date on 
the Troy Education Association’s seniority list. 
 
Article 35.9 Retirement 
 
All terms and conditions in Article 29 of the main collective bargaining agreement shall apply, except 
that “years of service as a teacher with the Troy School District" shall be defined as years of service 
to Niles Community High School (alternative education) or the K -12 program, or a combination of 
the two. 
 
Article 35.10  District Organization 
 
The terms and conditions outlined in Article 32 of the main collective bargaining agreement shall in 
no way apply to staff at Niles Community High School. 
 
35.11 Niles Head Teacher 
 
A. Qualification for Head Teacher.   An applicant for the head teacher position must have 
a secondary permanent, provisional, or professional certificate with at least three (3) years 
teaching experience at the secondary level. 
 
B. The position of head teacher shall be reopened every two years.  All applicants will be 
interviewed by the building supervisor.  Following these interviews, the building 
supervisor will appoint a head teacher whom he/she feels best meets the needs of the 
building. 
 
C. Suggested Duties:   
 
1. The head teacher shall be in charge of the building during the absence of the 
supervisor. 
 
2. The head teacher shall make decisions within the scope of the normal procedures 
and policies set for the building by the supervisor and Central Office. 
 
3. The head teacher’s workday shall begin thirty (30) minutes before the entry of the 
students and end thirty (30) minutes after the close of school. 
 
4. The head teacher shall assist the supervisor with the discipline problems of the 
building.  He/she shall handle minor discipline problems within the building and all 
discipline problems when the supervisor is unavailable.  
 
5. The head teacher shall have the responsibility of seeing that all accident forms are 
properly filled out in the absence of the supervisor.  
 
6. The head teacher shall acquaint himself/herself with the coordination of all 
services to the school. 
 
7. The head teacher shall be provided an opportunity to gain administrative 
experience in the following areas: (a) pupil records; (b) requisitions; (c) referrals; (d) 
proposals to Central Office; and (e) conduct some faculty meetings. 
 
Formatted: No underline
Formatted: Normal
301
 
64 
8. Shall serve as a liaison between the individuals of the staff and the administration 
when necessary. 
 
9. Since all of these listed duties cannot be handled at the same time by any one head 
teacher, it is the responsibility of the building supervisor to decide wh at duties shall 
be under the direction of the head teacher. 
 
Schedule C for Niles Community High School: 
2016-2017 
 
IN ADDITION TO THE BASE SALARY, THE FOLLOWING EXTRA DUTY ASSIGNMENTS REQUIRING TIME 
OUTSIDE REGULAR SCHOOL HOURS SHALL BE PAID AT THE PERCENTAGE FIGURE SHOWN 
MULTIPLIED BY $ $60,467 IN 2016-2017.   
 
 
CATEGORY I – 5.0%      $3023 
HEAD TEACHER 
 
CATEGORY II – 2.5%      $1,512 
COMMUNITY EDUCATION TEACHNOLOGY CHAIR 
 
CATEGORY III – 2.0%     $1,212 
SOCIAL JUSTICE 
 
CATEGROY IV – 1.0%     $605 
ACTIVITY SPONSOR 
SCHOOL STORE 
YEARBOOK 
CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT CHAIRPERSON 
 
CATEGORYV– 0.5%      $302 
EMPLOYMENT SUPERVISOR 
KEY CLUB 
NEWSLETTER 
STUDENT GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE C ALSO PROVIDES FOR THE BOARD TO PAY ALL TEACHER RETIREMENT TO THE MICHIGAN 
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT FUND. 
*Some language formerly within Article 35 is now stated within Appendix III.
302
 
65 
ARTICLE 36 
 
THIS ARTICLE ONLY APPLIES TO ANCILLARY TEACHERS WHO ARE NOT 
COVERED BY THE MICHIGAN TEACHERS’ TENURE ACT.   
 
RECOGNITION, REDUCTION IN RANK, REPRIMANDS, WARNINGS, OR DISCIPLINE, 
EVALUATION, LAYOFF/RECALL, TRANSFERS AND LEAVES : FOR TEACHERS NOT 
COVERED BY THE TEACHER TENURE ACT 
 
36.1   Recognition.  
 
The following provisions are in effect and exclusively applicable, where relevant, to a ncillary 
teachers, defined within the parties’ Collective Bargaining Agreement as teachers whose employment 
is not governed by the Michigan Teachers’ Tenure Act. By way of illustration, this includes TSD 
employees whose position does not require a teaching  certificate, who maintain licensing necessary 
for their positions, and who are regularly employed as guidance counselors, school psychologists, 
speech pathologists, consultants, administrative interns and social workers.  As used within this 
Article only, the term “teacher” means and includes only “ancillary teachers.” 
 
36.2   Reduction in Rank. 
 
No ancillary teacher shall be disciplined, reprimanded, or reduced in rank or compensation without 
just cause. Any such action shall be subject to the grievance procedure. In the event any probationary 
ancillary teacher is terminated and proceeds to arbitration, the arbitrator is limited to whether or not 
the termination was done in an arbitrary and/or capricious manner. 
 
36.3   Reprimands, Warnings, or Discipline. 
 
A. Any oral reprimanding, warning or disciplining of an ancillary teacher by a principal or other 
administrator shall be done in private, not in front of students, parents or other school employees, and 
it shall be done only for just cause.  
 
B. If a written record of an incident is inserted in a personnel file, the teacher shall receive a dated 
copy within ten (10) days of the administrator's knowledge of said incident. The teacher's copy will 
note that the item is being inserted into said file. Only those items so processed may be used in 
disciplinary actions against the teacher.  
 
The teacher shall have the right within thirty (30) workdays after receipt to insert a rebuttal to any 
item. Any rebuttal so inserted shall be attached to the objec t insertion by the person responsible for 
said file.  
 
C. Only the teacher's immediate supervisors or a central office administrator may reprimand, warn or 
discipline a teacher or have said reprimand, warning, or discipline enclosed in personnel files.  
 
D. Written record of an incident and rebuttal involving a teacher will be removed from the teacher's 
personnel file when he/she leaves the District for any reason except a leave of absence.  
303
 
66 
 
E.  All significant complaints and compliments, whether or not th ey seem valid, received by the 
Administration, shall be reported to the teacher named within one (1) week.  
 
If a complaint is filed against a named teacher by a student, the Association president or a mutually 
agreed upon designee shall have an opportunit y to be present at an interview with the student with 
the school principal or other school official.  However, the school board will not be required to afford 
the named teacher this opportunity if it determines within one  (1) week that the student's compla int 
is not a justified basis for any personnel action against the teacher. 
 If a complaint is filed against a named teacher by a student, the teacher (and if the teacher requests, 
an Association representative) shall have an opportunity to be present at an interview with the student 
within one week of the registering of the complaint with the school principal or other school official. 
However, the school board will not be required to afford the named teacher this opportunity if it 
determines within one week  that the student's complaint is not a justified basis for any personnel 
action against the teacher.  
 
This section shall not prevent the school board from conducting such investigations as it deems 
necessary with respect to other complaints or allegations of misconduct by a teacher.  
  
F.  If the Board plans to read a letter at a board meeting, the teacher , who is the object of the letter, 
will be contacted prior to its public reading. The Board will make every effort to protect teachers from 
unsubstantiated public criticism. 
  
G.   Under no circumstances shall a student's CA60 or confidential special education file contain any 
reference to a teacher's conduct or any information which may be construed as evaluating the teacher. 
  
H.   Termination Notice. A probationary ancillary teacher or the Board of Education must give a 
sixty- (60) day written notice before termination of contract unless mutually agreed upon. If the 
contract is broken by the probationer without proper written notification, the Board of Education may 
take proper action.  
 
36.4  Evaluation Procedure   
  
A.  All ancillary teachers not covered by the teacher tenure act shall be evaluated at least once every 
school year. Primary evaluators shall be identified to the ancillary teaching staff by October 1.   
Other evaluators and observers shall be identified prior to their observation.  In absence of a written 
evaluation during a school year, the teacher's performance is assumed to be acceptable.  
 
An ancillary teacher whose overall performance rating is “minimally effective” or “ineffective” may 
request to be observed by another administrator during the course of his/her next evaluation. 
However, upon such request, the District within its sole discr etion shall have the exclusive right to 
designate the administrator(s) who will conduct such observation(s). Further, any such requests must 
be made by the teacher in writing to the Superintendent or designee to the start of the subsequent 
school year.  
 
304
 
67 
B. The evaluations are to be in written form and signed by the evaluator and teacher. For the purpose 
of this provision, electronic forms and signatures shall be acceptable. One copy is to be given to the 
teacher. The Superintendent's copy will not be transmitted by the evaluator until after the evaluation 
conference, at which time the teacher receives the written evaluation.  
 
C. All teachers shall be given a copy of the Troy Educator Appraisal Model (TEAM) upon request. 
Additionally, all new teachers will be provided with a copy of the TEAM.  
 
D. If the principal suspects or has reason to believe that there will be a marked adverse change from 
the previous evaluation of the teacher, this fact is to be brought to the teacher's attention in writing in 
order that the teacher will have reasonable time within which to attempt to correct the situation.  
 
E. Written explanation shall be given for a rating of “minimally effective or ineffective ” in any 
domain of the e valuation. When domain ratings less than "effective or highly effective”  are given, 
recommendations to improve shall be listed on the evaluation, with sources of assistance included.   
When a teacher’s overall performance rating  is “minimally effective or ineffective”  in three (3) or 
more domains of the evaluation,  an Individual Development Plan (IDP) shall be developed by the 
evaluator in consultation with the teacher.  
 
F. An Individual Development Plan is a document recommending courses of action to be taken 
when an  evaluator determines it necessary or when a teacher’s overall performance rating  is 
“minimally effective or ineffective ” or a teacher’s performance has been rated as “ minimally 
effective or ineffective ” in three or more domains of the evaluation. C ompletion of recommended 
courses of action shall demonstrate intent to improve but may not be construed to mean that the 
teacher has successfully remedied the unacceptable performance.  T eachers placed on an IDP shall 
meet with the administrator writing the plan before said plan is implemented.  
 
G.  Formal observations of a teacher's work in the classroom shall take place for a minimum of 
twenty-five (25) minutes during a regularly scheduled class period. The teacher may request and have 
an additional formal observation.  
 
H. Procedures: The individual teacher shall be notified not less than the day preceding the first 
formal classroom observation nor longer than ten (10) working days in advance of the first formal 
classroom observation, but need not be notified of other observations.  
 
1. I n all cases, formal classroom observations for a particular written evaluation shall be 
performed by the evaluator(s) who will also be the person(s) producing the written evaluation. 
There should be a reasonable interval of time between observations for a written evaluation. 
Following observations teachers will be provided feedback including items that the 
evaluator(s) believe require alteration or improvement within ten (10) working days of the 
classroom observation.  
 
2. A teacher may submit a rebuttal if  he/she does not agree with the written evaluation. The 
rebuttal is to be attached to all object evaluations by the person responsible for the teacher's 
personnel file housing the object evaluation.  
305
 
68 
 
3. It is agreed that no observation shall be recorded b y any electronic device without the 
knowledge and agreement of the teacher.  
 
4. All formal observations of the teacher's performance shall be conducted openly and with 
the full knowledge of the teacher.  
 
5. Formal evaluation of a teacher's performance shall not take place the first week of the school 
year at elementary, the first week of each semester at secondary, on a half-day, during parent-
teacher conference days, on the day before or following a holiday or recess period.  
 
6. All written evaluations will be completed and submitted to the teacher at (or before) the 
end of the year evaluation conference which shall be held no later than ten (10) calendar days 
prior to the last day of the school year for teachers.  
 
7. If an administrator is going to recommend that a teacher be terminated, the teacher shall 
receive his/her final evaluation at least ten (10) working days before the recommendation is 
made to the Board.  
 
36.5   Layoffs of Ancillary Teachers shall be governed by provisions A. through K. 
 
A. Layoff means removal from the payroll with no employment rights other than retention of seniority 
status, extra-duty status, recall rights as noted below, and such other rights as provided. 
  
B. If, because of unforesee n circumstances, such as reduction in student population, changes in 
curriculum or deficit financial conditions, it becomes necessary to reduce staff, the following layoff 
procedures shall prevail. The order of reduction of staff will be as follows:  
 
1. Ancillary teachers in order of seniority (starting with the most senior) will be given the 
opportunity to take a voluntary layoff; provided, however, that no teacher will be allowed 
to take a voluntary layoff unless a qualified replacement for his/her position  is available. 
The term "qualified" means that the ancillary teacher must be qualified for the position as 
defined in 36.8.  
2. If the required number of layoffs cannot be effectuated through the voluntary procedure, 
involuntary layoffs will be effectuated in the following order:  
 
A. Ancillary teachers in order of seniority (least senior first), however, the Board will 
retain less senior teachers when no more senior teachers are available or qualified for 
the position.  
 
C. Notice of potential availability of voluntary layoffs shall be sent to all teachers not later than March 
fifteenth.  
 
306
 
69 
D. Requests for voluntary layoffs shall be sent to the Superintendent or designee no later than April 
fifteenth. 
E. A teacher requesting a voluntary layoff shall be notified no later than June 25th if the voluntary 
layoff will be provided. If the request for a voluntary layoff is denied, the teacher who made a timely 
and proper application for a voluntary layoff shall  be allowed to apply for any unpaid leave by July 
fifteenth, for which he/she would otherwise be eligible. In this case, the July fifteenth application 
shall be considered timely, and the controlling sections of Articles 19 and 20 shall determine if the 
leave is granted.  
 
F.  Subject to the provisions of this article, teachers with the most seniority will be retained to the 
last.  
 
G.  The voluntary layoff will be for at least one school year. Thereafter, the teacher may be recalled 
at any time.  
 
While on voluntary layoff the teacher may return to active employment in any position (to be selected 
by the Board) for which he/she is certified and qualified and which is held by a less senior teacher; 
provided, however, that such return must occur at the beginning of the school year unless the Board 
agrees otherwise, and the teacher must give the Board written notice of his/her intent to return by the 
preceding March 1.  
 
Should a voluntarily laid-off teacher refuse to return after recall, he/she shall be placed at the bottom 
of the recall list and, thereafter, be treated as any other involuntarily laid -off teacher. In the absence 
of written notice by either party, the teacher shall remain on voluntary layoff.  
 
H.  Written notice of involuntary layoff shall be r eceived by all affected teacher(s) by May first. 
Teachers who are involuntarily laid-off will retain seniority and recall rights for three school years. 
I.  The Board will make an effort to find another teaching position for involuntarily laid-off teachers. 
This will be accomplished by sending a list of all involuntarily laid -off teachers to a reasonable 
number of district(s) specifically requested by a teacher.  
 
J.  A teacher who is still on layoff status at the commencement of the school year immediately  
following receipt of layoff notice in paragraph E. above, but is recalled prior to December 1, shall be 
reimbursed by the Board for his/her actual cost of all direct -pay insurance benefits provided for in 
Article 26.  
 
K.  A teacher shall not be involunta rily laid-off because of curricular change unless such change 
would render the teacher non- qualified and he/she has refused other assignment opportunities for 
which qualified or has turned down training by the employer (at the employer's expense) to qualif y 
him/her for existing vacancies.  
 
A curricular change is defined as the elimination and/or alteration of a program which requires the 
change in certification requirements for the teacher. The Board's liability for training is limited to one 
semester or sixteen (16) semester hours (or equivalent), whichever is greater.  
307
 
70 
 
36.6 Recalls shall be governed by provisions A. through H.  
 
A. When the Board determines it is necessary to recall an ancillary teacher, the most senior qualified 
(as defined in Article 1 0) teacher shall be recalled. Should the teacher refuse recall, he/she shall be 
moved to the bottom of the recall list, but will not lose his/her seniority date. In this event, the Board 
shall then recall the next most senior qualified teacher who accepts recall.  
When a vacancy exists and the most senior laid -off teacher is qualified for the position but is not 
qualified or willing to become qualified for the position, said teacher will not be recalled but will 
retain his/her seniority and will be moved to the bottom of the recall list.  
 
If no laid-off teachers are qualified, then the Board shall hire a teacher to fill the vacancy. Nothing 
contained in this Article shall obligate the Board to transfer teachers or alter schedules to facilitate 
the recall of a laid-off teacher after October 1. 
  
Teachers, who are passed over for recall because they are not qualified for a vacancy, shall begin to 
accrue seniority from the date they are passed over in the same manner as if they had been recalled.  
 
B. No new teacher shall be hired before involuntarily laid-off teachers with recall rights who possess 
the necessary qualification have been given an opportunity for recall as per Sections K (under 
Layoffs) and Sections A and D (under Recall). 
C. Recall of involuntari ly laid-off teachers will be based on reversal of paragraph B above under 
Layoff; i.e., the last laid -off shall be the first recalled except as may be modified by paragraph A 
under Recall above.  
 
D. Involuntarily laid-off teachers being recalled will be given five calendar days from the date of the 
receipt of a registered or certified letter of recall to indicate their acceptance or rejection of 
reemployment. Failure to respond in writing within the five calendar day period (postmark) will cause 
the employee to be moved to the bottom of the recall list. (Also see Section 2.7)  
 
E. Teachers who are scheduled to be laid off or transferred into positions for which they are not 
qualified will be given tentative notice by May 15 of his/her qualification deficiency. At or before the 
end of the school year, the teacher will be given a second notice confirming that he/she is not qualified 
to teach the ensuing year's assignment. The teacher will be laid off if he/she either (1) fails to notify 
the Superintendent or d esignee by June 25 that he/she will pursue the necessary course work to 
become qualified; or (2) notifies the Superintendent or designee by June 25 that he/she will not pursue 
the necessary course work to become qualified. 
F. A teacher, who is notified prior to the commencement of a school year that it will be necessary to 
take classes in order to be qualified, will be permitted to complete the required classes prior to the 
start of the school year following his/her assignment for which requalification is required. The teacher 
is required to enroll in class(es) by April 1. 
G. A teacher who is laid off and who is paid unemployment compensation benefits (associated with 
his/her regular teaching assignment) during the summer immediately following the layoff and who is 
308
 
71 
subsequently recalled to the teaching position at the beginning of the next school year will be paid 
according to annual salary rate, such that his/her unemployment compensation plus that annual salary 
rate will be equal to the rate of salary he/sh e would have earned for the school year had he/she not 
been laid off, subject to the following conditions:  
 
1. The total of unemployment compensation plus salary earned by employment in the District 
shall not be below that which the employee would have recei ved had he/she been 
employed the entire school year.  
 
2. The salary earned through employment in the District shall not be less than his/her salary 
from same for a similar period during the preceding school year.  
 
H. The status of shared-time teachers who are recalled and the status of teachers recalled to shared -
time shall be covered by the following provisions:  
 
1. A shared-time teacher may be recalled to a shared-time position. The shared-time teacher 
shall receive pay and fringe benefits equivalent to his/her full-time equivalency status.  
2. A shared-time teacher may be recalled to a full -time position. If the teache r accepts the 
recall to a full-time position, the teacher shall receive full pay and fringe benefits.  
3. A full-time teacher who has requested shared-time for the school year in which he/she is 
recalled may be recalled to a shared -time position. If the teacher accepts the recall to the 
shared-time position, the teacher shall receive pay and fringe benefits equivalent to his/her 
full-time equivalency status.  
4.  A full-time teacher who has not requested shared-time for the school year in which he/she 
is recalled, may be recalled to a shared -time position. If the teacher accepts the recall to 
the shared -time position, the teacher shall receive pay prorated to his/her full- time 
equivalency status and shall receive full fringe benefits paid for by the Board. 
 
36.7.  Teacher responsibilities. 
Unauthorized Absence. An absence without prior notification from the teacher to the administration 
or sub-caller shall be considered unauthorized. Time lost by unauthorized absence from duty will 
result in a proportionate salary reduction for the first offense. The second offense shall be a 
proportionate salary reduction plus one -day mandatory suspension without pay. The third offense 
shall be a proportionate salary reduction plus a five (5) day mandatory suspension without pay.  
 
Absences from parent-teacher conferences because of college-level classes shall be authorized if the 
teacher notifies the building principal at least three weeks prior to parent -teacher conferences. 
Teachers who are absent from parent -teacher conferences shall make up the conference outside of 
regular teaching duties. 
36.8.  Professional qualifications 
309
 
72 
Qualifications: As used in this Article, the term "qualification" and "qualified" shall be defined as 
follows:  
A. To be qualified the ancillary teacher must b e licensed in accordance with state and federal 
law.  
 
36.9.  Class size 
A. Maximum Enrollments. When any class in a school reaches the maximum number of students, 
the Administration with the Association will formulate plans for handling the first enrollee over the 
maximum. The following shall be used as criteria in solving the overcrowding situation: 
  
1. Transfer student(s):  
a. within the school  
b. to another building  
 
2. Hire an additional teacher, using rooms available in some other community facilities if 
necessary. 
 
3.In the event of an emergency (defined as a situation which cannot be resolved by the above 
procedures) the planned maximum may be exceeded by two (2) pupils.  
 
4. Either party to the master agreement may request a meeting to discuss alternative methods 
to numbers 1, 2 and 3 above. In this situation, the parties shall meet and dis cuss alternative 
methods such as, but not limited to, those listed below:  
 
a. Voluntarily increasing shared-time/part-time assignments.  
b. Recall a laid-off teacher, which may possibly necessitate the involuntary transfer of 
a teacher(s).  
c. Voluntary assignment of a sixth teaching period in the secondary buildings. (Pay 
shall be equal to one-fifth (1/5) of the teacher's pay rate.)  
d. The voluntary assigning of a sixth teaching period in the secondary may be 
accomplished after the following criteria have been considered:  
 
1) Availability and district-wide seniority within the department of the affected 
building.  
2) The number of sixth period class assignments the teacher has taught in past 
years.  
3) Teacher possesses the contractual requirements for teaching said course.  
4) Any other criteria upon which the parties agree.  
 
If a qualified teacher accepts the assignment, he/she shall be placed at the bottom of a separate 
seniority list. This list is developed for and within the procedures of these subsections only. The intent 
is to allow as many different teachers as possible the opportunity to teach a sixth period when and if 
the assignment is necessary and agreeable to the Association, Board and teacher.  
 
310
 
73 
High School/Middle School. Shoul d it be necessary for a sixth period assignment to go beyond the 
first semester, the assignment shall be re -offered within the same procedure as used in the first 
semester. The intent of re- offering is to allow another bargaining unit member the opportunity to 
voluntarily accept a sixth teaching assignment.  
The intent of Section 4 is to allow the parties the opportunity to discuss and agree upon alternative 
methods of handling an overload of students at the secondary level. Should alternative proposals 
outlined in section 4 above not be acceptable to the parties, sections 1, 2 or 3 shall be implemented.  
36.10 Ancillary Teacher Transfers 
 
A. Bargaining unit regular and extra-duty positions which will be vacant at the start of the next school 
year shall be posted at each school, at the Administrative Center and at the TEA Office. After building 
assignments are made, the resulting known vacancies will be posted for seven (7) calendar days 
between May first and July thirty -first. All bargaining unit regular and extra -duty positions which 
become vacant during the school year shall be posted at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the 
position being filled, except by a substitute teacher. The posting shall contain the following 
information:  
 
1. The building or special service department  
2. The tentative grade level or teaching schedule  
3. The academic and professional qualifications desired for the position  
4. The certification requirements and, if any, the accreditation requirements  
 
Teachers desiring transfer to one of the posted vacancies shall submit a transfer form to the Human 
ResourcesEmployee Services Department by the end of the day on the last day of the posting. Any 
application shall be confidential at the request of the employee.  
 
B. The Human Resources Employee Services  Department will forward all applications to the 
appropriate building administrator within seven (7) calendar days of the close of the posting period 
for scheduling of interviews. The administrator will consider the applicants' qualifications as they 
relate to the posting as well as all applicants' respective length of area seniority  (elementary, middle 
school and high school) with the District.  
 
C. After all qualified applicants have been interviewed, the Human ResourcesEmployee Services  
Department will inform all applicants of the results within ten (10) workdays following the last  
interview. If a teacher's request for voluntary transfer is denied, the teacher may request a meeting 
with the building principal involved. At that meeting the teacher will be notified of the reasons for 
the denial of the transfer request. This procedure may be continued to the Deputy Superintendent for 
Instruction, K-12 and then to the Superintendent of Schools. 
D. When new buildings are to be opened, earlier posting dates may be added to the schedule in A. 
above.  
 
E. When a school is opened that is not a receiving school for a closed school, the principal, if a 
principal was transferred, may voluntarily transfer up to one -half of his/her current teachers to the 
new building. The remaining positions shall be filled by teachers transferring from other buildings or 
311
 
74 
returning from leave. If a current princ