risis, Response 
and Closure 
Additional Planning References  
o All-Hazards Emergency Operations Planning Guidance for Schools 2014. 
o MI HEART Safe Schools:  www.migrc.org/miheartsafe 
191
Concept of Operations 
Section 2 
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 
192
Concept of Operations 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-1 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
During the initial response , school personnel are usually first on the scene. 
Staff and faculty will take charge and manage the incident until it is resolved , or command is 
transferred to someone more qualified and/or to an emergency responder agency with legal 
authority to assume responsibility. Staff and faculty will seek guidance and direction from local 
officials and may seek technical assistance from local, state, and federal agencies and industry 
where applicable.  
The principal or designee is responsible for activating the Barnard Elementary EOP, including 
common and specialized procedures , as well as hazard -specific procedures. These immediate 
actions may include:  
Implementation of ALICE Protocol (Alert, Lockdown,  Inform, 
Counter, Evacuate), or Minimal Security Mode 
 
 
• When a person or situation presents an immediate threat to students/staff in
or near the building. All exterior doors and classroom doors are locked and
students/staff stay in their offices, work areas, and classrooms.
Lockdown
• When conditions are safer outside than inside a building. Requires all
staff/students to leave the building immediately.
Evacuation
• When conditions are safer inside the building than outside. For severe weather
sheltering, students/staff are held in the building safe areas, such as interior
rooms or a basement, away from windows. For hazardous material release
outdoors with toxic vapors, students/staff are to remain in their classrooms,
with windows and doors sealed and all ventilation systems shut off. Limited
movement may be allowed. Taking shelter inside a sealed building is highly
effective in keeping students/staff safe.
Shelter-in-place
193
Concept of Operations 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-2 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Notification Procedures 
In case of an emergency at Barnard Elementary, the flow of information after calling 9-1-1 shall 
be from the school to the District Office. Information will include the nature of the incident and 
the impact on the school building and students/staff. 
In the event of a fire, the individual discovering the fire shall activate the building fire alarm 
system. Unless there is a lockdown incid ent or a shelter -in-place incident in progress, the 
building shall be evacuated. If a lockdown or shelter -in-place incident is in progress, the 
evacuation shall be limited to the area immediately in danger from the fire. 
In the event Barnard Elementary is in receipt of information, such as a weather warning that 
may affect any school within the district, the information shall be provided to the District Office.  
Notification During Summer or Other School Breaks 
If a school administrator or other crisis resp onse team member is notified of an emergency 
during the summer (or other break period), the response usually will be one of limited school 
involvement. In that case, the following steps will be taken: 
o Contact appropriate administrator to disseminate information to Crisis Response Team 
members and request a meeting of all available members. See Appendix 1 for 
Emergency Contact Rosters. 
o Notify general faculty/staff and families of students with appropriate information. 
o Schedule a faculty/staff meeting for an update before students return to school. 
o Be alert for repercussions among students/staff.  
o When school reconvenes, institute appropriate support mechanisms and referral 
procedures, if necessary.  
 
Notification During a School-Sponsored Activity Off School Premises 
If a school administrator or other crisis response team member is notified of an emergency 
during an off-premises school function, the response would closely mirror the response for an 
emergency on school premises during summer or other school breaks, including limited school 
involvement. In that case, the following steps will be taken: 
o The on -site staff member in charge of the event would contact  the appropriate 
administrator to disseminate information to Crisis Response Team members and 
request a meeting of all available members. See Appendix 1 for Emergency Contact 
Rosters. 
o Notify general faculty/staff and families of students with appropriate information. 
o Schedule a faculty/staff meeting for an update. 
194
o Be alert for repercussions among students/staff.  
o Institute appropriate support mechanisms and referral procedures, if necessary. 
Assignment of Responsibilities 
District Office 
 Disseminate information internally to students and staff. 
 Communicate with parents/guardians, etc., media and the larger school community. 
 Identify a line of succession, including who is responsible for restoring business 
functions for school. 
 Disseminate information internally to students and staff. 
 Communicate with parents/guardians, etc., media and the larger school community. 
 Identify a line of succession, including who is responsible for restoring business 
functions for school. 
 Secure and provide needed personnel, equipment and supplies, facilities, resources 
 Determine when to close schools and/or send students/staff to alternate locations. 
qualified individual. At all times, the principal still retains responsibility for the overall 
safety of students and staff. However, delegating authority to manage the incident allows 
the principal to focus on policy-level activities and interfacing with other agencies and 
parents/guardians, etc. The principal shall be the liaison between the superintendent’s 
office and the Site Incident Commander. 
Responsibilities may include: 
 Overall decision-making authority in the event of an emergency at his/her school 
building, until the arrival of emergency first responders. 
 Ensuring that the plan is coordinated with the district’s plans and policies. 
 Ensuring that staff members serving on the school crisis response team are available, 
as well as providing a replacement for any serving teacher. 
 Identify relocation areas for classrooms and administrative operations. 
 Brief and train staff regarding their additional responsibilities. 
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-3 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
195
Concept of Operations 
 Create a system for registering students (out of district or into alternative schools). 
and services required for continued operation.  
 Ensure systems are in place for rapid contract execution after an incident. 
Principal 
The principal may serve as the Site Incident Commander, or delegate that authority to a 
 Identify strategies to continue teaching (e.g., using the Internet, providing tutors for 
homebound students, rearranging tests). 
 Assigning school emergency responsibilities to staff, as required. 
 Ensuring that school personnel and students participate in required drills. 
Office Staff 
Responsibilities may include: 
 Answering phones and assisting in receiving and providing consistent information to 
callers. 
 Providing for the safety of essential school records and documents. 
 Executing assignments, as directed by the Site Incident Commander. 
 Assisting with any health incidents, as needed. 
 Executing assignments, as directed by the Site Incident Commander. 
Teachers/Instructional Assistants 
Teachers shall be responsible for the supervision of students and shall remain with  
students until directed otherwise. 
Responsibilities may include: 
 Supervising students under their care. 
 Taking steps to ensure the safety of students, staff and other individuals in the  
implementation of incident management protocols. 
 Directing students in their charge to inside or outside assembly areas, according   
to established incident management procedures. 
 Taking attendance when class relocates or evacuates to another location. 
 Reporting missing students to the Site Incident Commander or designee. 
 Executing assignments, as directed by the Site Incident Commander. 
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-4 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
196
Concept of Operations 
 Aiding the principal. 
Crisis Response Team 
 In conjunction with the district and local emergency services, creating and maintain 
the EOP. 
 Organizing team response activities. 
 Aiding during an emergency, in accordance with designated roles. 
Responsibilities may include: 
 Obtaining first aid services for injured students from a person trained in first aid. 
 Rendering first aid, if necessary. 
Counselors, Social Workers, and Psychologists 
Counselors, social workers and psychologists will aid with the overall direction of the 
incident management at the site. 
Responsibilities may include: 
 Taking steps to ensure the safety of students, staff and other individuals in the 
implementation of incident management protocols. 
 Directing students in their charge, according to established incident management 
protocols. 
 Rendering first aid, if necessary. 
 Assisting in the transfer of students, staff and other individuals when their safety is 
threatened by a disaster. 
 Assist with grief counselling. 
Health Assistants 
 Administering first aid or emergency treatment, as needed. 
Custodians/Maintenance Personnel 
Responsibilities may include: 
 Surveying and reporting building damage to the Site Commander. 
 Controlling main shutoff valves for gas, water and electricity and ensuring that no 
hazard results from broken or downed lines. 
 Providing damage control, as needed. 
 Assisting in the conservation, use and disbursement of supplies and equipment. 
 Keeping Site Incident Commander informed of condition of school. 
 Maintaining up-to-date floor/school layouts. 
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-5 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
197
Concept of Operations 
 Executing assignments, as directed by the Site Incident Commander. 
 Supervising administration of first aid by those trained to provide it. 
 Organizing first aid and medical supplies. 
 Executing assignments, as directed by the Site Commander. 
Responsibilities may include: 
Food Service/Cafeteria Workers 
Responsibilities may include: 
 Using, preparing and serving food and water, on a rationed basis, whenever the 
feeding of students and staff becomes necessary.  
 Executing assignments, as directed by the Site Incident Commander. 
Transportation / Bus Drivers 
Responsibilities may include: 
 Supervising the care of students if a disaster/incident occurs while students are on 
the bus. 
 Transferring students to a new location, when directed. 
 Supervising students under their charge. 
 Taking steps to ensure the safety of students, staff and others in  
the implementation of incident management protocols. 
 Reporting missing students to the Site Incident Commander or designee. 
 Executing assignments, as directed by the Site Incident Commander. 
 Obtaining first aid services for injured students from a person trained in first aid. 
 Rendering first aid, if necessary. 
Students 
Responsibilities may include: 
 Cooperation during emergency drills, exercises and incidents. 
 Learning to be responsible for themselves and others during an incident. 
 Understanding the importance of not being a “bystander” and reporting situations 
of concern. 
 Developing an awareness of natural, technological and human -caused hazards and 
associated prevention, preparedness and mitigation measures. 
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-6 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
198
Concept of Operations 
Other Staff (e.g. Substitute Teachers, Paraprofessionals) 
 Directing students in their charge to inside or outside assembly areas, according 
to established incident management procedures. 
 Taking attendance when class relocates or evacuates to another location. 
 Executing assignments, as directed by the Site Incident Commander. 
Responsibilities may include: 
 Taking an active part in school incident response/recovery activities, as age 
appropriate. 
Parents/Guardians, Etc. 
Responsibilities may include: 
 Encouraging and supporting school safety, violence prevention and incident 
preparedness programs within the school. 
 Participating in volunteer service projects for promoting school incident 
preparedness. 
 Providing the school w ith requested information regarding an incident, early/late 
dismissals and other related release information. 
 Practicing incident management preparedness in the home to reinforce school 
training and ensure family safety. 
Direction and Control 
The designated Site Incident Commander is responsible for establishing objectives and policies 
During emergency operations, the school administration  retains administrative and policy 
control over their employees and equipment. However, personnel and equipment necessary 
to carry out the responsibilities and assignments of the Crisis Response Team may be directed 
by the Crisis Team Coordinator. 
If the s chool’s own resources are insufficient or inappropriate to deal with an emergency, 
assistance from local emergency services, organized volunteer groups, and/or the state will be 
requested. 
Emergency Facilities/Crisis Response Team Post 
This post will be established on-scene, away from risk of damage from the emergency , most 
likely in the main office or conference room.  If needed, however, alternate locations may be 
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-7 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
199
Concept of Operations 
 Understanding their roles during a school emergency. 
 Following school instructions. 
for emergency operations and providing general guidance for emergency response and 
recovery operations within their building.  
Concept of Operations 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-8 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
identified. Pre -determined sites for command posts outside the school building will be 
identified, in cooperation with local emergency responder agencies.     
An off -site post will be established in the vicinity of the incident site should an emergency 
threaten, but not yet occur, or if there is no specific hazard impact site (such as a severe winter 
storm or area-wide utility outage). 
Primary Post Location: Main Office 
Alternate Post 
Location: Cafeteria 
Continuity of School Administration 
The line of succession for the principal is:    
1. Head/Lead Teacher 1 Assistant Principal 
2. Head/Lead Teacher 2 Crisis Response Team Leader 
3. Head/Lead Teacher 3 Site Incident Commander 
School Incident Command System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
200
Concept of Operations 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-9 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Incident Command Team 
 
Coordination 
Coordination with Policy/Coordination Group  
In complex incidents, a Policy/Coordination Group will convene at the school district operations 
or command center. The role of the Policy/Coordination Group is to:  
o Support the on-scene Site Incident Commander.  
o Provide policy and strategic guidance.  
o Help ensure that adequate resources are available.  
o Identify and resolve issues common to all organizations.  
o Keep elected officials and other executives informed of the situation and decisions.  
The Barnard Elementary p rincipal and Site Incident Commander will keep the 
Policy/Coordination Group informed. 
Coordination with First Responders  
An important component of the Barnard Elementary EOP is a set of interagency agreements 
Site Incident 
Commander/Principal
Operations 
Section
Director of 
Maintenance 
and 
Operations
Operations 
Coordinator
Custodial 
Team
Planning
Section
Superintendent
Assistant 
Superintendent
Director of 
Communications 
and Strategic 
Planning
Logistics 
Section
Food Service 
Director
Food Service 
Coordinator
Kitchen Staff
Finance/Admin 
Section
Assistant 
Suprintendent 
of Business 
Services
Finance 
Director
Accountant
201
Concept of Operations 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-10 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
between various local and county agencies to aid in timely communication. These agreements 
help coordinate services between the agencies and Barnard Elementary.  
Various agencies and services include , but are not limited to,  local and county government , 
such as mental health, law enforcement, and fire departments. The agreements specify  the 
type of communication and services provided by one agency to another. The agreements may 
also make school personnel available beyond the school setting in an incident or traumatic 
event taking place in the community.  
Upon arrival of qualified first r esponders, command will be transferred , and a  transfer of 
command briefing shall occur. The school ’s Site Incident Commander may be integrated into 
the Incident Command structure or assume a role within a Unified Command structure.  
Communications 
Communication is a critical part of incident management. This section outlines Barnard 
Elementary School’s communications plan and supports its mission to provide clear, effective 
internal and external communication between the school, students /staff, parents/guardians, 
etc., responders, and media. 
Internal Communications  
Communication between Staff/Faculty Members  
Faculty and staff will be notified when an incident occurs and kept informed as additional 
information becomes available and as plans for management of the situation evolve. The 
following practices will be utilized to disseminate information internally when appropriate: 
o RAVE Panic Button / Staff Assist app. 
o E-mail and SMS text message. 
o Regularly scheduled faculty meetings. 
Communication with the District Office  
The Site Incident Commander will notify the principal of the school’s status/needs. The 
principal will notify the District Office. The District Office will notify the Oakland Schools ISD of 
the status of all district schools. He/she will designate staff member(s) to monitor all 
communications.  
 
202
Concept of Operations 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-11 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
External Communications  
Communicating with the larger school community begins before an incident occurs.   
Parents/guardians, etc. , media, and first responders will be appropriately informed and 
updated.  
Communication with Parents/Guardians, Etc. 
Before an incident occurs, Barnard Elementary will: 
o Develop a trusting relationship with parents/guardians, etc.   
o Educate them on how to access alerts and incident information. 
o Identify parents /guardians, etc.,  who are willing to volunteer in case of an incident .  
Include them in preparation efforts and training.  
o Be prepared with translation services for limited English or non-English-speaking 
families and students.  
In the event of an incident, Barnard Elementary will:  
o In coordination with the Director of Communications and Strategic Initiatives, 
disseminate information via text messages, radio announcements, school/district Web 
site/social media sites and e -mails to inform parents /guardians, etc.,  about what is 
known to have happened.  
o Implement a plan to manage phone calls and parents/guardians, etc., who arrive at the 
school.  
o Describe how the school and school district are handling the situation.  
o Provide reunification procedures.  
o Provide information regarding possible reactions of their children and ways to talk with 
them.  
o Provide a phone number, Web site address, or recorded hotline where 
parents/guardians, etc., can receive updated incident information.  
o Inform parents/guardians, etc., and students/staff about when and where school will 
resume.  
Communication with the Media  
In the event of an incident, the Site Incident Commander will:  
o Refer all media inquiries to the Director of Communication and Strategic Initiatives. 
o Establish an off campus briefing area for media representatives.  
o Determine the need to establish or participate in a Joint Information Center.  
203
Concept of Operations 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-12 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
o Coordinate messages with the principal.  
Barnard Elementary staff members are to refer all questions and requests for information to 
the designated spokesperson. The district PIO maintains media contacts at the major television, 
Internet, and radio stations. In the case of an incident, these media contacts will broadcast 
Barnard Elementary  School’s external communications plans , including any established 
information hotline for parents/guardians, etc. 
Communication with First Responders  
The Site  Incident Commander will maintain communication with first responders during an 
incident. Transfer of command will occur when first responders arrive on the scene to assume 
management of the incident under their jurisdiction. Barnard Elementary frequently exercises 
the EOP with first responders to practice effective coordination and transfer of command.  
Communication after an Incident 
After the safety and status of students /staff have been assured, and emergency conditions 
have abated, staff/faculty will assemble to support the restoration of the school’s educational 
programs. Defining mission -critical operations and staffing will be a starting point for the 
recovery process. Collecting and disseminating information will facilitate the recovery process.  
The staff/faculty teams will:   
o Conduct a comprehensive assessment of the physical and operational recovery needs.  
o Assess physical security, data access, and all other critical se rvices (e.g., plumbing, 
electrical).  
o Examine information technology assets and personnel resources .  D etermine the 
impact on the school operations for each asset and resource that is unavailable or 
damaged.  
o Document damaged structures, lost equipment and resources, and special personnel 
expenses that will be required for insurance claims and requests for state and federal 
assistance.  
o Provide detailed facilities data to the school district office so temporary space 
reallocation needs and strategies can be estimated.  
o Arrange for ongoing status reports during the recovery activities to: 
o Estimate when the educational program can be fully operational. 
o Identify special building, equipment, and personnel issues or resources that 
will facilitate the resumption of classes.  
204
Concept of Operations 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-13 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
o Educate students /staff and parents /guardians, etc.,  on available crisis counseling 
services.  
o Inform the district of recovery status.  
The school district will: 
o Identify recordkeeping requirements an d sources of financial ai d for state and federal 
disaster assistance.  
o Establish absentee policies for teachers/students after an incident.  
o Establish an agreement with mental health organizations to provide counseling to 
students and their families after an incident.  
o Develop alternative teaching methods for students unable to return immediately to 
classes (e.g., correspondence classes, videoconferencing, tele-group tutoring, etc.).  
o Create a plan for conducting classes when facilities are damaged (e.g., alternative sites, 
half-day sessions, portable classrooms).  
o Get stakeholder input on prevention and mitigation measures that can be incorporated 
into short-term and long-term recovery plans.  
Administration, Finance, and Logistics 
Agreements and Contracts  
If school resources prove to be inadequate during an incident, Barnard Elementary will request 
assistance from local emergency services, other agencies, and industry in accordance with 
existing mutual aid agreements and contracts. Such assistance includes equipment, supplies, 
and/or personnel. All agreements are in writing and entered by authorized school officials. 
Agreements and contracts identify the school district officials authorized to request assistance 
pursuant to those documents.  
Pre-negotiated a greements and contracts are included in Appendix J:  Memorandums of 
Agreement/Understanding.  
Finance  
Barnard Elementary is responsible for establishing the administrative controls necessary to 
manage the expenditure of funds and to provide reasonable accountability and justification for 
expenditures made to support incident management operations. These administrative controls 
205
Concept of Operations 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-14 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
will be completed in accordance with the established local fiscal policies and standard cost 
accounting procedures.  
Recordkeeping  
Activity Logs  
The ICS Section Chiefs will maintain accurate logs , recording key incident ma nagement 
activities, including: 
o Issuance of protective action recommendations to the students/staff.  
o Evacuations. 
o Casualties. 
o Mitigation or termination of the incident. 
Preservation of Records  
Vital records must be protected i n order to continue normal school operations foll owing an 
incident. These include legal documents and student files, as well as property and tax records. 
The main causes of damage to records are fire and water; therefore, essential records will be 
protected accordingly. Details are outlined in the Continuity of Operations (COOP) Procedures, 
a functional annex of the All-Hazards Emergency Operations Pl anning Guidance for Schools 
2014 and should be inserted into Appendix F of this plan. 
The Barnard Elementary school’s Crisis Response Team is responsible for  the overall 
maintenance and revision of the EOP. The Exercise Planning Team is responsible for 
coordinating training and exercising the EOP. Both teams are expected to work cooperatively 
to make recommendations for revising and enhancing the plan.  
The school board and the superintendent are responsible for approving and promulgating this 
plan. Local fire, law enforcement, and emergency manager approval and suggestions will also 
be requested.  
Plan Development, Maintenance, and Distribution 
Approval and Dissemination of the Plan  
The school board, together with the principal and superintendent , will approve and 
disseminate the plan and its annexes following these steps:  
o Review and validate the plan. 
o Present the plan (for comment or suggestion). 
206
Concept of Operations 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-15 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
o Obtain plan approval (school board). 
o Distribute the plan. 
Record of Changes  
Each update or change to the plan will be tracked. The record of changes will include:  the 
change number, the date of the change, and the name of the person who made the change. 
The record of changes will be in table format  (Page 8 (viii) of this EOP)  and maintained by the 
School Crisis Response Team.  
Record of Distribution  
Copies of plans and annexes will be distributed to those tasked in this document. The record of 
distribution will be kept as proof that tasked individuals and organizations have acknowledged 
their receipt, review, and/or acceptance of the plan. The school Crisis Response Team will 
indicate the title and name of the person receiving the plan, the date o f delivery, and the 
number of copies delivered.  
Plan Review and Updates  
The basic plan and its annexes will be reviewed annually by the school Crisis Response Team, 
emergency management agencies, and others deemed appropriate by school administration. 
The principal will establish a schedule for annual review of planning documents.  
The school EOP will be updated based upon deficiencies identified during incident management 
activities and exercises and when changes in threat hazards, resources and capabilities, or 
school structure occur.  
Training and Exercising the Plan  
Barnard Elementary understands the importance of training, drills, and exercises in maintaining 
and planning for an incident. To ensure that district personnel and community first responders 
are aware of their duties and responsibilities under the school plan and the most current 
procedures, the following training, drill, and exercise actions will occur. The designated 
planning team will coordinate training and exercising efforts in accordance with state law.  
Basic and refresher training sessions will be conducted during the first in-service day of the 
school year for all school personnel in coordination with local fire, law enforcement, and 
emergency managers.  
207
Concept of Operations 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 2-16 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Mandatory EOP training will include: 
o Orientation to the EOP. 
o First aid, CPR, and AED (if applicable) training for all staff. 
o Team training to address specific incident response or recovery activities, such as 
parents/guardian, etc., s tudent reunification, access and functional needs , as well as 
deaf, deaf/blind and hard-of-hearing students/staff, and relocation. 
o Team training to address mental health and pupil and teacher safety.  
o Team training to address a plan to train staff and improve building security (ALICE 
certification, drills and updates at staff meetings).  
Additional training may include drills, tabletop, and functional exercises. Drills will be 
conducted throughout the school year per state and district requirements.  
All Barnard Elementary staff members are encouraged to develop personal and family 
emergency plans. Each family should anticipate that a staff member may be required to remain 
at school following a catastrophic event. Knowing that the family is prepared and can handle 
the situation will enable school staff to do their jobs more effectively.  
 
208
Emergency Contact Rosters 
Appendix A
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 
209
Emergency Contact Rosters 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan A-1 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
School Crisis Response Team 
Name / Position Office Phone Cell Phone E-mail 
Melanie 
Morey/Principal 
248-823-4320 248-318-0818 mmorey@troy.k12.mi.us 
Gwen Simon / Head 
Teacher 1 
248-823-4332 248-561-7382 gsimon@troy.k12.mi.us 
Deanna Dutts / Head 
Teacher 2 
248-823-4353 586-675-4332 ddutts@troy.k12.mi.us 
Brittany Elsey / Social 
Worker 
248-823-4344 248-563-5164 belsey@troy.k12.mi.us 
Sara Ventimiglio / 
School Psychologist 
248-823-4344 810-338-6045 sventimiglio@troy.k12.mi.us 
 
Michael Bordon / Day 
Custodian 
248-823-4325 586-260-3461 barcustodian@troy.k12.mi.us 
Cathy Matthes / 
Secretary 
248-823-4305 248-227-4211 cmatthes@troy.k12.mi.us 
Jodie Montana / 
Secretary 
248-823-4306 248-709-1810 jmontana@troy.k12.mi.us 
James Myrick / Physical 
Education Teacher 
248-823-4336 586-484-4224 jmyrick@troy.k12.mi.us 
Paul Couretas / Physical 
Education Teacher 
248-823-4336 248-410-4149 pcouretas@troy.k12.mi.us 
 
 
 
210
Emergency Contact Rosters 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan A-2 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
District Staff 
Name / Position Office Phone Cell Phone E-mail 
Richard Machesky / 
Superintendent 
248-823-4003 248-613-4111 rmachesky@troy.k12.mi.us 
Christine DiPilato / 
Assistant Superintendent 
248-823-4020 248-860-2371 cdipilato@troy.k12.mi.us 
Kris Griffor / Assistant 
Superintendent 
248-823-4021 586-246-3933 kgriffor@troy.k12.mi.us 
Kerry Birmingham / 
Director of 
Communications and 
Strategic Initiatives 
248-823-4035 248-421-7222 kbirmingham@troy.k12.mi.us 
Robert Carson / Director 
of Maintenance and 
Operations 
248-823-4067 248-961-4750 rcarson@troy.k12.mi.us 
 
General Contact Numbers 
 Contact Phone Number 
First Responders - 
Public Safety 
Agencies - 
Hospitals 
General Emergency 9-1-1 
Oakland County Emergency 
Manager (Thomas Hardesty) 248-858-5300 
Troy Police Department EMERGENCY: 9-1-1 / Non-
Emergency: 248-524-3588 
Troy Fire Department EMERGENCY: 9-1-1 / Non-
Emergency: 248-524-3419 
Poison Control 1-800-222-1222 
Local Hospital (Troy Beaumont) 248-964-5000 
Child Protective Services (Oakland 
County) 1-855-444-3911 
211
Emergency Contact Rosters 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan A-3 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
General Contact Numbers 
 Contact Phone Number 
 
Utilities 
Phone Company – TSD 
Technology 
248-823-5061 
Gas Company – Consumers 1-800-477-5050 
Electric Company – DTE Energy 1-800-477-4747 
Heating, Ventilation, Air 
Conditioning – TSD Operations 
248-823-4050 
 
212
Class Rosters and Schedules 
Appendix B 
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 
213
Class Rosters and Schedules 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan B-1 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Class rosters:  
All class rosters are available electronically through PowerSchool 
 
Troy School District 2019/2020 Calendar 
AUGUST  
Tuesday, 20: K-12 Teacher Professional Learning; No School for Students 
Wednesday, 21: K-5 Teacher Workday; 6-12 Teacher Professional Learning; No School for 
Students 
Thursday, 22: 6-12 Teacher Workday; K-5 Professional Learning; No School for Students  
Tuesday, 27: K-12 Students – AM only; FIRST DAY OF SCHOOL AM Only Elementary Specials 
Teachers Management Day; PM Teacher Workday          
Wednesday, 28: K-12 Students/Teachers - Full Day  
Thursday, 29: K-12 Students/Teachers - Full Day  
Friday, 30: No School – K-12 Students/Teachers  
  
SEPTEMBER  
Monday, 2: Labor Day – K-12 Students/Teachers – No School  
Tuesday, 3: K-12 Students/Teachers - Full Day   
Wednesday, 25: K-12 Students – Early Release Day; K-12 PM Teacher Professional Learning  
  
OCTOBER   
Thursday, 10:  K-8 Students - Full Day; 9-12 Students - AM Only 9-12 Conferences – Afternoon 
and Evening  
Wednesday, 16: 6-8 Conferences – Evening Only  
Barnard Elementary Daily Schedule 
Full Day: 9:09 AM – 4:07 PM  
Half Day: 9:09 AM – 12:59 PM (8/27, 10/23, 10/24, 3/19, 6/9, 6/10, 6/11)  
Early Release Day: 9:09 AM – 1:09 PM (9/25, 10/30, 11/20, 2/5, 2/26, 3/25, 4/23, 5/13) 
 
LUNCH SCHEDULE 
GRADE LUNCH RECESS 
4 11:40 - 12:00 12:00 - 12:20 
K 11:50 - 12:10 12:10 - 12:30 
5 12:10 - 12:30 12:30 - 12:50 
3 12:20 - 12:40 12:40 - 1:00 
1 12:40 - 1:00 1:00 - 1:20 
2 1:00 - 1:20 12:40 - 1:00 
 
214
Class Rosters and Schedules 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan B-2 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Thursday, 17:  K-5 and 9-12 Students - Full Day; 6-8 Students - AM Only 6-8 Conferences – 
Afternoon and Evening  
Friday, 18: K-5 and 9-12 Students - Full Day; 6-8 Students - AM Only; 6-8 PM Teacher 
Compensatory Time  
Wednesday, 23: K-5 Students - AM Only; 6-12 Students - Full Day K-5 Conferences - 
Afternoon and Evening   
Thursday, 24: K-5 Students - AM Only; 6-12 Students - Full Day K-5 Conferences - Afternoon 
and Evening   
Wednesday, 30: K-12 Students – Early Release Day; K-12 PM Teacher Professional Learning  
Thursday, 31: 6-12 End of First Marking Period  
 
NOVEMBER  
Friday, 1:  6-12 Students ONLY - No School; K-5 Students – Full Day; 6-12 AM Teacher 
Workday   
Wednesday, 20:  K-12 Students – Early Release Day; K-12 PM Teacher Professional Learning  
Thursday, 21: K-5 End of Reporting Period #1/3  
Friday, 22: K-5 Students ONLY - No School; 6-12 Students – Full Day; K-5 AM Teacher Workday  
Wednesday, 27: No School for Students  
Thursday, 28: Thanksgiving Recess – No School   
 
DECEMBER  
Monday, 2:  School Resumes – Full Day  
Friday, 20:  Last Full Day before Winter Recess for K-12 Students/Teachers   
Monday, 23:  Winter Recess Begins    
 
JANUARY  
Monday, 6:  K-12 Students/Teachers – School Resumes Full Day   
Monday, 20: Martin Luther King, Jr. Day – K-12 Students/Teachers – No School Tuesday, 21:  
K-8 Students – Full Day; 9-12 Students - AM Only (HS Exams); 9-12 - PM Teacher Workday  
Wednesday, 22:  K-8 Students – Full Day; 9-12 Students - AM Only (HS Exams); 9-12 - PM 
Teacher Workday  
Thursday, 23:  K-5 Students – Full Day; 6-12 Students - AM Only (HS Exams); 6-12 - PM 
Teacher Workday; 6-12 End of First Semester  
Friday, 24: 6-12 Students ONLY - No School; K-5 Students – Full Day; 6-12 Full Teacher 
Workday  
 
FEBRUARY  
Wednesday, 5: K-12 Students – Early Release Day; K-12 PM Teacher Professional Learning  
Monday, 17:  Mid-Winter Recess Begins  
Wednesday, 19: School Resumes – Full Day  
215
Class Rosters and Schedules 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan B-3 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Wednesday, 26: K-12 Students – Early Release Day; K-12 PM Teacher Professional Learning  
  
MARCH  
Thursday, 5:  K-5 Full Day; 9-12 Spring Conferences – Evening Only  
Friday, 6: K-5 Students ONLY – No School; K-5 End of Reporting Period #2/3; 6-12 Students - 
Full Day; K-5 Full Teacher Workday  
Thursday, 12: 6-8 Conferences – Evening Only  
Thursday, 19: K-5 Students – AM Only; 6-12 Students – Full Day; K-5 Conferences – Afternoon 
and Evening  
Wednesday, 25: K-12 Students – Early Release Day; K-12 PM Teacher Professional Learning  
 
APRIL  
Wednesday, 1: 6-12 End of Third Marking Period  
Thursday, 2: K-12 Students – No School; 6-12 AM Teacher Workday;   
Friday, 3: Spring Break - K-12 Students/Teachers No School   
Monday, 13: School Resumes - Full Day  
Thursday, 23: K-12 Students – Early Release Day; K-12 PM Teacher Professional Learning  
 
MAY     
Wednesday, 13: K-12 Students – Early Release Day; K-12 PM Teacher Professional Learning  
Monday, 25:  Memorial Day – K-12 Students/Teachers No School  
 
JUNE   
Tuesday, 9:  K-12 Students AM Only (HS Exams); 6-12 PM Teacher Workday; K-5 PM Teacher 
Management Day  
Wednesday, 10:  K-12 Students – AM Only (HS Exams); K-12 PM Teacher Workday  
Thursday, 11:  K-12 Students – AM Only (HS Exams); K-12 PM Teacher Workday  
 
216
Class Rosters and Schedules 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan B-4 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
 
 
 
217
Class Rosters and Schedules 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan B-5 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
 
218
School Maps and Floor Plans 
Appendix C 
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 
219
School Maps and Floor Plans 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan C-1 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
220
Specific Response Actions 
Appendix D
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 
221
Response Actions Addressed 
o ALICE Protocol (Alert, Lockdown, Inform, Counter, Evacuate) 
o Minimum Security Mode 
o Weather: Shelter-In-Place 
o Relocation 
o Reunification 
ALICE PROTOCOL (Alert, Lockdown, Inform, Counter, 
Evacuate) 
Purpose: This protocol is used when there is a threat of violence or serious incident that could 
jeopardize the safety of students/staff (e.g., intruder, active threat, hostage incident, gang 
violence, etc.).  
In the event of a threat, any staff member should first utilize the RAVE Panic Button /Staff Assist  
app., or call 9-1-1 and identify the name and address of the school, describe the emergency, 
indicate that the school is initiating ALICE Protocol , provide a description of suspect(s) and 
If safe to do so:  
outside to immediately move to the off -campus assembly area(s), account for the 
designated sites. (Administration) 
 Notify the District Office. (Administration) 
 Follow established ALICE Protocol.  
MINIMUM SECURITY MODE 
Purpose: This protocol is used when there is a situation requiring the separation/isolation of 
students from a specific area or incident. This would NOT include a situation involving a threat 
of violence or serious incident that could jeopardize the safety of students or staff. 
General Staff Procedures 
Minimum Security Mode Protocol would be initiated either by the  Staff Assist portion of the 
RAVE Panic Button app., a PA announcement, or both. Protocol would include clearing hallways, 
closing and locking all doors, accounting for all students and remaining within the classroom, 
while continuing normal classroom activities and awaiting further instruction. 
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan D-1 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
222
Specific Response Actions 
weapon(s) if known, and identify the location of the primary school staff, or command post. 
The staff member should remain on the phone to provide updates and additional information 
to the emergency dispatcher. 
 Utilizing the RAVE Panic Button/Staff Assist app., if applicable, n otify staff and classes 
students and be prepared to evacuate off-campus to a relocation site.  
 Notify transportation department to stop all in -bound buses and redirect them to 
General Staff Procedures 
Specific Response Actions 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan D-2 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
WEATHER/ENVIRONMENTAL: SHELTER-IN-PLACE  
Purpose:  This protocol provides a refuge for students/staff and the public inside the school 
building during an emergency such as severe weather or hazardous material releas e outdoors. 
Designated locations are in areas of the building that maximize the safety of occupants. Shelter-
in-place is used when evacuation would place people at risk. Shelters may change depending on 
the emergency.  
General Staff Procedures 
Principal or Designee:  
 Make the following announcement (or equivalent) using the rave Panic Button/Staff 
Assist app., building public address system, two -way radio, telephone, or megaphone: 
“YOUR ATTENTION, PLEASE. WE ARE IMMEDIATELY IMPLEMENTING SHELTER -IN-PLACE 
PROCEDURES DUE TO <DESCRIBE EMERGENCY>. STUDENTS AND STAFF ARE DIRECTED 
TO MOVE TO THEIR DESIGNATED SHELTER LOCATIONS AND SAFE AREAS. ALL STAFF AND 
STUDENTS OUTSIDE ARE TO IMMEDIATELY MOVE TO THE PROTECTION OF AN INSIDE 
ROOM.”   
 Order students/staff outside to move inside the building.  
 Use the RAVE Panic Button/Staff Assist app., building public address system, megaphone, 
two-way radio, telephones, or runners to gather staff and students inside. Note: Ensure 
persons entering the building from a potentially contaminated environment DO NOT 
integrate with those already inside to avoid cross-contamination concerns.  
 Direct staff to close all windows and doors.  
 Monitor building entry to be at only controlled points.  
 If warranted, order the shut -off of heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems to 
stop the inflow of outside air into the building.  
 Notify district office that the school is “SHELTERING-IN-PLACE.”  
 If there is a severe weather event, monitor the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA) radio.  
 Monitor all student movement including class exchanges.   
 Be prepared to announce change in status.  
Custodial/Maintenance Staff:   
 If necessary, turn off heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems.  
 Ensure all exterior entrances are secured.  
Teachers:  
 If necessary, move students into designated safe  areas such as inside rooms with no 
windows, bathrooms, utility closets, and hallway without large windows or doors.   
 Close classroom doors and windows, if leaving.  
 Have everyone kneel and be ready to cover their heads to protect from debris.  
 If outside , direct students into the nearest school building interior safe area or other 
appropriate shelter.  
223
 For severe weather, if there is no time to get into a building or shelter, attempt to squat 
or lie low, in the nearest ravine, open ditch, or low spot away from trees and power poles.  
 If movement into the building would expose persons to hazardous chemica l plume, 
teachers should move to designated outdoor assembly areas upwind or cross wind from 
the spill.  
 Move students from portable classrooms to an interior safe area in a permanent 
structure.  
 If remaining in the classroom, lock/secure the room and cont inue activities within 
building if safe to do so.    
 Direct staff to move students to the evacuation staging area for loading onto buses; 
however, in the event of the potential for a lockdown being in progress, first responders 
may escort students directly from their classrooms to the buses once the school is secure.  
 Office staff takes stored medications, medical devices, class lists, contact information, 
sign out sheets and Go-Kit to the relocation site.  
relatives to the reunification site.  
remote site where students will  be accounted for and released to their parents/guardians, etc. 
During emergencies, parents/guardians, etc., often rush to the school incident site to check on 
the safety of students/staff. The resulting blockage of streets and large number of people can 
this chaos is to redirect those concerned individuals to a site that is remote from the school, and 
to evacuate students/staff to that site.  
General Staff Procedures 
Principal or Designee:  
 Advise the host school or facility of the decision to implement the protocol and begin 
setting up the bus evacuation staging area.  
 Notify the District Office of the relocation.  
 Determine the appropriate pre-designated relocation site and evacuation route.  
 Decide if it is safe for the students/staff to walk to the relocation or if buses are required. 
If needed, request buses or alternate means of transportation.  
 Request law enforcement to provide security at the evacuation staging  area and along 
the evacuation route, and to provide for traffic control/security at the relocation site.  
 If necessary, make the following announcement (or equivalent) using the RAVE Panic 
Button/Staff Assist app., building public address system, two -way radio, telephone, or 
megaphone: “YOUR ATTENTION PLEASE. FOR SAFETY REASONS, WE ARE RELOCATING 
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan D-3 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
224
Specific Response Actions 
 Request the District Office to activate appropriate teams from each school and send them 
to the relocation site to assist with reunification.  
 Provide the school media/public information representative with detailed instructions 
and a prepared information release to read to the public in order to direct c oncerned 
 Designate a staff member to serve as the reunification site leader.  
RELOCATION  
Purpose:  This protocol is used when circumstances require the relocation of students/staff to a 
severely hamper response actions by emergency agencies. The most effective way to prevent 
Specific Response Actions 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan D-4 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
ALL STUDENTS AND STAFF TO _____________________. WE WILL CONDUCT 
REUNIFICATION FROM THAT LOCATION.”  
 Direct staff to move students to the evacuation staging area for loading onto buses; 
however, in the event of the potential for a lockdown being in progress, first responders 
may escort students directly from their classrooms to the buses once the school is secure.  
 Office staff takes stored medications, medical devices, class lists, contact information, 
sign out sheets and Go-Kit to the relocation site.  
 Request the District Office to activate appropriate teams from each school and send them 
to the relocation site to assist with reunification.  
 Provide the school media/public information representative with detailed instructions 
and a prepared information release to read to the public in order to direct concerned 
relatives to the reunification site.  
 Designate a staff member to serve as the reunification site leader.  
Teachers:  
 Take class roster, phone lists, student medication/medical devices and emergency Go-Kit 
as you exit to the designated assembly area.  
 After evacuating, take attendance and account for all students.  
 Report any missing students to school administration.  
 Hold up a RED status card to indicate you have missing, injured, or extra students.  
 Use a GREEN status card if every student is accounted for.  
 Maintain management of your class.  
 After receiving the alert for relocation, if necessary, guide students to the designated 
evacuation staging area for movement to the relocation site.  
 Aid access and functional needs students/staff, as well as deaf, deaf/blind and hard -of-
hearing students/staff.  
 Request help, if needed. While en route to the relocation site, the teachers will prepare 
list of all students on the bus, which will be delivered to the reunification Site Incident 
Commander, upon arrival.   
 Follow the instructions of the reunification site staff when you arrive.  
 You may be asked to assist in staffing the site.  
 Staff who are not assigned to a specific classroom/student, should report to the 
command center to support relocation operations.  
REUNIFICATION  
Purpose:  This protocol is used to ensure a safe and secure means of accounting for students  
and reuniting parents/guardians, etc., with their children whenever the school building 
or grounds is rendered unsafe and a remote site is needed. 
 
 
 
 
225
Specific Response Actions 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan D-5 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
General Staff Procedures 
Principal or Designee:  
 After consulting with the incident commander, determine the appropriate 
predesignated relocation site and safe evacuation route.   
 Notify the contact person at the relocation site to prepare for arrival of students. 
 Designate a staff member to be at the reunification site.  
 Send additional personnel to staff the reunification site, if necessary.  
Reunification Site Staff:  
 Check identification of all non-uniformed personnel who arrive to assist.  
 Secure a holding area for arrivi ng students/staff away from waiting family members. 
Establish an adult reporting area for parents/guardians, etc., to sign -in and have 
identification checked.  
 Establish a student release area where students will be escorted to meet their 
parent/guardian, etc. and sign out.  
 Establish a mental health area and direct staff to escort parents/guardians, etc., of any 
injured, missing or deceased student to the area for staff to provide notification in 
private.   
 Ensure counseling services are available at the reunification site.  
 Keep students on buses or in a holding area separate from waiting parents/guardians, 
etc., until they can be signed out.  
 Only release students to authorized persons after checking proof of identity and signing 
a student release form.  
 Once they have signed out their student, instruct parents/guardians, etc., to quickly 
depart the site in order to make room for others.    
Teachers:  
 Supervise and manage students.  
 Provide a list of students to the reunification site staff, upon arrival.  
 Provide proper assistance to access and functional needs students/staff, as well as deaf, 
deaf/blind and hard-of-hearing students/staff.  
 Request help, if needed.  
 Follow the instructions of the reunification site staff when you arrive.  
 You may be asked to provide staffing assistance.  
 Staff who are not assigned to a specific classroom/student, should report to the 
command center to support reunification operations.   
 
 
  
226
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
Appendix E 
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 
227
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-1 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
HAZARDS ADDRESSED 
Violence/Threat Incidents:  
o Active Violence Incident  
o Intruder/Trespassing  
o Verbal/Written Threat  
o Bomb Threat  
Other Emergency Incidents: 
o Medical Emergency  
o Cardiac Emergency 
o Severe Weather  
o Fire/Explosion  
o Flooding  
o Utility Failure  
o Chemical Incident  
o Biological Incident  
o Radiological/Nuclear Incident  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
228
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-2 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
ACTIVE VIOLENCE INCIDENT  
Purpose: This protocol is used when there is an armed person or trespassing -related incident 
that could jeopardize the safety of students/staff.  
Notification Procedures: If an active threat of violence (“active threat”) becomes apparent in 
any school location (internal or external) the threat should be reported immediately (as soon 
as it is safe to do so).  
 Utilize the RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9-1-1   
 Initiate ALICE Protocol.  
School Notification Procedures:  The school may use the following systems to notify school 
faculty, students/staff, and parents/guardians, etc., of an existing “active threat” to the school:  
The Troy School District currently utilizes the Schoo l Messenger System, which would include 
notification by: 
 SMS text message  
 Phone call 
 E-mail 
 School/District Web Site 
 
In addition to the above means of communication, the school should also use public mass 
media (e.g., radio and television) for appropriat e announcements to keep the school and 
community informed. Individuals are encouraged to minimize the use of personal cell phones 
unless it is to report the incident or to assure their personal safety or the safety of others. Mass 
use of cell phones typica lly results in system overloads and the general failure of the system 
until traffic diminishes.  
Individual /Group Safety:  
 Stay calm and assess the situation; determine the location of the threat if possible.  
 Utilize the RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9-1-1, as soon as it is safe to do so. 
 Evacuate the area by a safe route if possible. If not possible, seek an area of safe refuge.   
 If persons must seek a safe refuge, secure all doors and windows as quickly as possible 
and barricade as many items betwee n persons and the threat as possible (e.g., 
armchairs, tables, cabinets, etc.) (ALICE Protocol)   
 Render first aid to injured persons that may be in or near the area. Do this so 
long as it is safe to do so. Simple first aid includes applying direct pressure to the 
wound and elevating, if possible.   
 
229
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-3 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 DO NOT attempt to make contact (verbal or physical) with the individual responsible for 
the threat, unless no other option is available (ALICE Protocol).  
 If persons must have contact with the individual posing the threat, attempt to find some 
cover (e.g., solid objects) to place between them and the individual (ALICE Protocol).  
 Be prepared to combat the subject individually to neutralize the threat, if lives are in 
imminent danger. Active resistance may increase the chance of survival, but this is 
strictly a personal decision (ALICE Protocol).  
 If persons barricade themselves in a room, identify objects that could be used as 
weapons to deter the threat from pursuing them at that location. Examples may be 
student desks, keys, shoes, belts, books, cell phones, iPads, book bags, laptops, pens, 
pencils, scissors, etc., or any item capable of being launched or used against an attacker. 
Articles of clothing can be used for protection against a knife -wielding attacker.  If 
persons are fortunate to be in a group, develop a plan for how they will combat the 
attacker posing the threat should he/she gain access to the area of refuge. Frequently 
it is possible to overwhelm an attacker if multiple people resist or attack from different 
directions at the same time. While this reduces the risk of numerous serious or fatal 
injuries to the group, the chances of someone being injured is still present (ALICE 
Protocol).  
 DO NOT leave a secure location during an active threat, even if the fire alarm activates.    
 DO NOT open the door for anyone but law enforcement. This includes o thers seeking 
refuge, as this may be a ploy by the attacker to gain access.   
 DO NOT approach law enforcement officers as they attempt to locate and neutralize 
the threat. During this time, the officers are trained to seek out and respond to the 
threat, which could include the use of deadly force. They are not able to assist with the 
evacuation or provide medical assistance to injured parties. Once the threat has been 
neutralized, the officers will return immediately to organizing the evacuation of the 
school and obtaining or providing emergency medical response.  
INTRUDER/TRESPASSING  
Purpose: This protocol is used when there is an intruder or trespassing -related incident that 
could jeopardize the safety of students/staff.  
All Staff Responsibilities:   
 Identify the problem and the location.  
 Approach the subject and determine the nature of their business within the building 
 Ask the subject for their identification. Take note of their identification information if 
further follow-up is required by public safety personnel.  
 Request that the subject accompany a staff member to the office.  
230
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-4 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 If the subject is looking for a specific student, check their file for court orders (e.g., 
personal protection orders, custody orders).   
 If there is no acceptable reason for the subject to be in the building, ask the subject to 
leave the building site.   
 If the subject refuses to leave:    
o Utilize the RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9-1-1.   
o Call the District Office to report the incident.  
o Provide the subject's description and information gathered. Await a police 
response.   
o If appropriate, initiate ALICE Protocol.   
VERBAL/WRITTEN THREAT  
Purpose: This protocol is used when it is necessary to respond to verbal or written threats of 
students toward self, other students/staff, or the school. Often, students make threats of harm 
in moments of anger, frustration, or when challenged. Administrators, with the help of student 
support services personnel --particularly school psychologists --must assess threats, which are 
classified low, medium, or high level. Each level has specific indicators and responses. Safety of 
students/staff is always paramount.  
Immediate Response: An administrator learns of verbal or written threat of harm to self, 
others, or property made by student.  
 Call security (if applicable).  
 Administrator will immediately determine the level of threat with input from the school 
counselor, psychologist, social worker, and school resource officer, where appropriate.  
 The principal/administrator will consult with school counselors, as needed.  
Low Level threat determination:  
Threat:   
 Is stated in vague or general manner.   
 Reflects anger, frustration, lack of hope, or distrust.   
 Does not include a specific target other than self.   
 Does not specify concrete steps in which it will be carried out.   
 Is developmentally inappropriate or unrealistic.  
The administrator will consult with a school counselor, school psychologist, and/or school social 
worker regarding:   
 Needs of the student.   
 Involvement of the student’s parents.   
 Identification of appropriate referral resources.   
231
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-5 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Consultation is provided to school staff regarding strategies for managing low-level 
threats.   
 Refer student to the appropriate school/district resource for further assistance.  
Medium Level threat determination: 
Threat:  
 Is clearly stated, often a function of anger or frustration.  
 Is uncertain about specific targets of threat.  
 Is lacking in capacity or resources to act on threat.  
 Is lacking in concrete steps taken to carry out threat.  
 Is suggestive of attention-seeking behavior.  
 Could continue or escalate, if not addressed.  
The administrator will contact a school counselor, school psychologist, and/or school social 
worker to meet immediately with the student.  
Based on the student meeting:   
 Principal/administrator identifies employee to contact student’s parents/guardians, 
etc.  
 Identify and offer appropriate referral resources to parents/guardians, etc.  
 Notify parents/guardians, etc., of intended victims, as appropriate.  
 Disciplinary actions are determined by the principal/administrator.  
 Refer student to the appropriate school/district resource for further assistance.  
 Principal/administrator may call 9 -1-1. Law Enforcement may investigate and provide 
further referrals.  
High Level threat determination:  
Threat:  
 Is clearly stated.  
 Targeted to specific individuals or property.  
 Identifies behaviors that can realistically be carried out.  
 Implies that concrete steps have been taken to carry out threat.  
Principal/Administrator initiates the following:  
 Call 9-1-1.  
 Student remains under administrative supervision.  
 Notify parents/guardians, etc., of student making threat and request their immediate 
response to the school.  
 Notify parents/guardians, etc., of the threatened student. 
232
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-6 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Principal/administrator contacts school counselor, school psychologist, and/or school 
social worker to conduct emergency assessment of threat of harm to self, others, or 
property.   
 School counselor, school psychologist, and/or school social worker reviews record, 
conducts necessary assessment, and consults with administrator regarding the threat 
of harm to self, others, or property.  
 Offer appropriate referral resources to parents/guardians, etc.  
 Offer follow-up support to intended victim(s).  
 Determines disciplinary actions.  
 Refer student to the appropriate school/district resource for further assistance.  
BOMB THREAT  
Purpose:  This protocol is used when there is a bomb threat -related incident that could 
jeopardize the safety of students/staff.  
All Staff Responsibilities:  
 Any employee of the school who learns of a bomb threat shall immediately inform the 
principal/administrator.  
 Utilize the RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9-1-1. 
 Complete the Bomb Threat Checklist form. 
Administrator Responsibilities:  
 Immediately notify 9-1-1, if not already done.  
 Mobilize the School Crisis Response Team.  
 Communicate with personnel/superintendent regarding bomb threat condition.  
 Limit access to building.  
 Assemble and deploy search teams.  
 Search the entire building and grounds.  
 DO NOT use any type of radio or cellular communication unless the area has been 
cleared. 
Teachers Responsibilities:  
 Take attendance.  
 Make a quick and complete visual scan of the classroom and any other common areas 
they have been assigned.  
 As staff members scan their classroom, they should:  
o Divide the room into various search levels.  The first sweep covers all objects 
resting on the floor or built into the walls, up to your waist.   
233
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-7 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
o Scan the room from waist to chin height.   
o Cover the room from the top of the head to the ceiling, including air ducts, 
window tops, and light fixtures.   
o Look among the books and on the desks for anything unusual.   
o If something unusual is noticed, move people away from the hazard. DO NOT 
attempt to touch it or tamper with it in any way. Immediately report the location 
of the object to the principal/administrator.  
 DO NOT use any type of radio or cellular communication unless the area has been 
cleared.  
Custodians and Other Staff Members Responsibilities:  
 Search and secure public areas. Make a visual inspection of the boiler room, cafeteria, 
hallways, common areas and lavatories. If something unusual is no ticed, DO NOT 
attempt to touch it or tamper with it in any way. Immediately leave the area and report 
it.  
 Search and secure the perimeter of the building. Make a visual inspection around the 
outside of the building. If something unusual is noticed, DO NOT attempt to touch it or 
tamper with it in any way. Immediately leave the area and report it.  
 General search guidelines include:  
o Start on the outside of the school and work inward.   
o When inside, start at the bottom and work up.   
o Search personnel should always work towards each other.   
o Listen for background noises.   
 DO NOT use any type of radio or cellular communication unless the area has been 
cleared.  
Bomb Threat Assessment  
These responses are designed to ensure the school responds to a serious bomb threat in a 
systematic and orderly manner so panic and miscommunication among police, the school, and 
parents/guardians, etc., does not occur.  
High Risk (Specific and Realistic):  A threat that appears to pose an immediate and danger to 
the safety of others.  
 Threat is direct, specific, and realistic. May provide names of possible victims.  
 The caller (e.g., perpetrator) identifies themselves.  
 Threat suggests concrete steps have been taken towards carrying out the threat.  
 Perpetrator makes statements indicating they have practiced with a weapon or have 
had the intended victim under surveillance.    
234
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-8 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Medium Risk (Increased Level of Realism):  A threat that could be carried out, although it may 
not appear entirely realistic.  
 Threat is more direct and more feasible.  
 Wording in the threat suggests the perpetrator has given some thought on how the act 
will be carried out.  
 There may be general indications of a possible place and time.  
 There is no strong indication the perpetrator has taken preparatory steps, although 
there may be some indirect reference pointing to that possibility.  
 Indication the perpetrator has details regarding the availability of components needed 
to construct a bomb.  
 Increased specificity to the threat: “I’m serious!” or “I really mean this!”  
Low Risk (Lacks Realism):  A threat that poses a minimum risk to the victim and public safety.  
 Threat is vague and indirect.  
 Information contained within the threat is inconsistent, implausible, or lacks detail.  
 The caller is known and has called numerous times.  
 The threat was discovered on the wall and/or the note with the threat was discovered.  
 The threat is made by a young child and there is laughter in the background.  
Phoned Threat:  
 Start recording device, if available.  
 Signal another staff member to listen in, if possible.  
 Transcribe the threat.  
 Fill out the Bomb Threat Checklist form.  
 Notify the principal/administrator of the threat.  
 Be available after the call for the school’s School Crisis Response Team and law 
enforcement to interview you. 
Written Threat:  
 Handle the document as little as possible.  
 On a separate piece of paper, re -write the threat exactly as it reads. On this copy, also 
record:   
o Where the document was found.  
o The date and time the item was found.  
o Any situations or conditions surrounding the discovery.  
o Any other person you are aware of who saw the threat.  
 Secure the original document. If small, place in a bag or envelope. DO NOT fold, 
crumple, tear, or mark the item in any way. If on a large object, secure the location.  
235
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-9 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Notify the principal/administrator of the threat.  
E-mail Threat:  
 Leave the message open on the computer monitor.  
 Notify the principal/administrator and the information technology department of the 
threat.  
 Print, photograph, or copy down the message. Include the header of the e-mail.   
 Save the e-mail.  
Verbal Threat:   
 Detain the person making the threat, if possible and practical.  
 If the person who made the threat leaves, note which direction they are going. If 
possible and safe, follow them at a discreet distance. Have another staff member notify 
principal/administrator.  
 Note the description of the person who made the threat:   
o Name, if known.  
o Race.  
o Sex.   
o Type and color of clothing.   
o Body size.   
o Hair color.   
o Distinguishing features.  
 Write down the threat exactly as it was communicated to you:   
o Exact wording.   
o Who made the threat?  
o The date and time of the threat.   
o Where the person who made the threat is now, if known. 
 Notify the principal/administrator, if someone else has not already done so.  
Rumor of a Threat:  
 If you overhear a rumor about a bomb or explosive device threat or incident, write down 
exactly what you heard, from whom you heard it, and then report the rumor to the 
principal/administrator.  
 Record, document, and preserve threat information.  
 Report threat to school security, police, and the District Office. Notify staff as 
appropriate.  
 Assemble School Crisis Response Team.  
 Assess the threat and determine response.  
 
236
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-10 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Search:  
 Assemble and deploy search teams.  
 Teams search assigned areas; teachers and staff search own areas.  
 If suspicious item is found, under no circ umstances should it be touched, tampered 
with, or moved. Staff will immediately leave the area, shut the door, and report the 
object to the building administrator. Law enforcement will need to know where the 
bomb is located, who discovered it, why it is su spected of being a bomb, and if it has 
been disturbed or moved.  
If a Suspicious Item is Found:  
 DO NOT TOUCH THE ITEM.  
 Person(s) who found the item reports it to the principal/administrator.  
 Notify police, fire and EMS, via the RAVE Panic Button app, or dialing 9-1-1. (The Bomb 
Squad, if needed, would be notified by the Troy Police Department).  
 Notify others and terminate search.  
 Secure area where item is located, but DO NOT guard it (stay away from the item).  
 Notify staff of the situation and direct them to prepare for evacuation.  
 Select evacuation routes and assembly areas that are away from the suspicious item.  
 Redeploy search teams to clear evacuation routes and assembly areas.  
 Meet arriving emergency responders and brief them on the situation, let them speak 
with the person who found the item, and inform them where the item is located.  
 When evacuation routes and assembly areas are cleared, conduct evacuation. Law 
enforcement will ass ume command of the scene. The School Crisis Response Team 
should remain at the scene to inform and manage evacuees, media, parents/guardians, 
etc., and others as appropriate.  
 Continue with reoccupy or dismiss action, as appropriate. 
MEDICAL EMERGENCY  
Purpose:  This protocol is used when there is a medical emergency-related incident that could 
jeopardize the safety of students/staff.  
Administrator Responsibilities:  
 Utilize the RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9 -1-1. Notify of the specific location/entry  
door. 
 Notify District Office.  
 Report to the scene. Secure and isolate the area.  
 Have staff trained in first aid/CPR respond to the area to assist.  
237
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-11 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Assign an individual to meet and escort the emergency medical responders to the 
scene.  
 Notify the parents/guardians, etc.  
 Provide the police/EMS emergency information.  
 Accompany the students/staff to the hospital if the parents/guardians, etc., cannot be 
there.  
Staff Responsibilities:  
 Utilize the RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9 -1-1. Notify of the specific location/entry 
door. 
 Evaluate the incident scene.  Isolate and secure the area.  Initiate Minimal Security 
Mode if needed.  
 Notify the principal/administrator as soon as possible. Advise them of the number of 
injured and of the situation and give the location.  
 If the scene is safe, proceed to the victim and assess the severity of the injury. 
 Stabilize the victim and administer first aid.  
 Assist the emergency medical responders  
 If the scene is not safe, wait for EMS to respond.  
 
Allergic Reaction:   
 Notify District Office and the principal/administrator immediately.  
 Utilize the RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9-1-1. Notify of the specific location/entry 
door. 
 Administer counteractive agent (e.g., EpiPen), if necessary.  
 Contact parents/guardians, etc.     
CARDIAC EMERGENCY 
Purpose: Used when a suspected sudden cardiac arrest incident. 
Administrator Responsibilities: 
 Utilize the RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9 -1-1. Notify of the specific location/entry 
door. 
 Notify District Office. 
 Report to the scene. Secure and isolate the area. Initiate Minimal Security Mode if 
needed. 
 Have staff trained in first aid/CPR respond to the area to assist. 
 Assign an individual to meet and escort the emergency medical responders to the 
scene. 
238
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-12 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Notify the parents/guardians, etc. 
 Provide the police/EMS emergency information 
 Accompany the students/staff to the hospital if the parents/guardians, etc., cannot be 
there. 
Staff Responsibilities: 
 If first on the scene, utilize the RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9-1-1. Notify of the specific 
location/entry door. 
 Evaluate the incident scene. Isolate and secure the area. Initiate Minimal Security Mode 
if needed. 
 Notify the principal/administrator as soon as possible and give the location. 
 Assess patient (e.g., airway, breathing, and circulation). 
 If AED available, have trained staff member operate AED. 
 If no AED or trained staff member, have a staff member trained in First Aid/CPR respond 
to the area to assist. 
 EMS will take charge of the situation upon arrival. 
SEVERE WEATHER  
Purpose:  This protocol is used when there is a severe weather -related incident that could 
jeopardize the safety of students/staff.  
Severe Weather Watch:   A precautionary alert issued when conditions are favorable 
for the development of severe weather in a specific area.   
Severe Weather Warning: Issued when severe weather has been sighted or indicated 
by radar in a specific area.  Note:  At the first sign of severe weather, all students/staff 
outside should return to the building.  
Administrator Responsibilities:  
 Office staff to monitor the early warning (NOAA) weather radio.  
 Upon activation, office staff shall notify the District Office.  
 Principal/administrator should monitor developing weather conditions.  
 If necessary, initiate severe weather procedures.  
 If conditions warrant protective measures to be taken, order students/staff to proceed 
to the shelter area.  
 If there is a medical emergency, utilize the RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9 -1-1. Notify 
of the specific location/entry door. 
 Principal/administrator announces when students/staff are to return to their rooms.  
 If damage has occurred to the building, the principal/administrator is to evacuate the 
affected areas/campus.  
239
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-13 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Do not release students/staff until the severe weather passes.  
Staff Responsibilities:  
 Upon the order to shelter-in-place the students, proceed to the shelter area.  
 Account for all students. Report missing students to the office.   
 If there is a medical emergency, utilize the RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9 -1-1. Notify 
of the specific location/entry door. 
 Notify the principal/administrator as soon as possible.  
 Keep students quiet and calm.  
Custodial Staff Responsibilities:  
 Monitor developing weather conditions.  
 Contact the principal/administrator for direction.  
 If conditions warrant protective measures to be taken, assist students/staff to proceed 
to the shelter area.  
 If there is a medical emergency, call 9-1-1.  
 If damage has occurred to the building, evacuate the affected areas/campus.  
FIRE/EXPLOSION  
Purpose:  This protocol is used when there is a fire -related incident that could jeopardize the 
safety of students/staff.  
Evacuate the building by using the fire alarm while simultaneously shouting “FIRE, FIRE, FIRE!”. 
Anyone witnessing the fire WILL UTILIZE THE RAVE PANIC BUTTON APP. OR CALL 9-1-1.  
 Identify the name and address of the school, describe the emergency, and indicate that 
the school is being evacuated.  
 Remain on the phone to provide updates, location within the building of the fire, and 
additional information.  
Administrator Responsibilities: 
 Notify students/staff outside to immediately move to the off-campus assembly area(s), 
account for the students, and be prepared to evacuate off-campus to a relocation site.  
 Assist in evacuating the building.  
 Notify the transportation department to stop all in -bound buses; redirect them to 
designated sites.  
 Notify the District Office.  
 Assist the fire department with locating the utilities.  
 Ensure the building is evacuated, if applicable.  
240
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-14 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 If students/staff need to evacuate campus, request transportation to the designated 
site. Also take class lists, stored medication, medical devices, contact information, sign 
out sheets and Go-Kit.   
 Signal an "All Clear" when appropriate.  
 Notify the custodial staff to recharge/replace the fire extinguishers where and when 
appropriate.    
Teachers and Office Staff Responsibilities:  
 Activate the fire alarm.  
 Notify students in classroom to line up accordingly and proceed to the nearest safe area.  
 In the event of an evacuation, follow the evacuation procedures:   
o Take student medication, medical devices and record/attendance books, if 
possible, and close the classroom door. 
o Reassemble students at the designated area.   
o Take attendance.   
o Report missing student(s) as soon as possible to the principal/administrator.   
o Await further instructions from the principal/administrator.   
o Re-occupy the building when an "All Clear" is announced.  
Custodial and Maintenance Staff Responsibilities:  
 Assist the fire department in locating the utilities.  
 Ensure the building is evacuated, if applicable.  
 If outside, assist in moving students to a safe assembly area and wait for further 
instructions.  
FLOODING  
Purpose: This protocol is used when there is a flood-related incident that could jeopardize the 
safety of students/staff.  
Flood Watch: Flooding is possible.  
Flash Flood Watch: Flash flooding is possible.  
Flood Warning: Flooding is occurring or will occur soon.  
Flash Flood Warning:  A flash flood is occurring; seek higher ground on foot 
immediately.  
Before a Flood:  
 Make sure that if the school or office is in a flood plain, it is elevated and/or reinforced.  
 Make sure that the furnace, water heater, and electric panel is elevated, if susceptible 
to flooding.  
241
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-15 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Are check valves installed in sewer traps to prevent flood water from backing up into 
the drains of the building?  
 Have barriers (e.g., levees, beams, floodwalls) been constructed to stop flood water 
from entering the building?  
 Have walls in basements been sealed with waterproofing compounds to avoid seepage?  
During a Flood: 
 If a flood is likely in the area, persons should:  
 Listen to the radio or television for information.  
 Be aware that flash flooding can occur. If there is any possibility of a flash flood, move 
immediately to higher ground. DO NOT wait for instructions to move.  
 Be aware of streams, drainage channels, canyons, and other areas known to flood 
suddenly.  
 Make sure the staff member who oversees the NOAA radio shares information, so 
personnel are prepared.  
If persons must prepare to evacuate, they should do the following:  
 Secure the classroom or office. If time permits, bring in outdoor furniture or equipment. 
Move essential items to an upper floor.  
 Turn off utilities at the main switches or valves, if instructed to do so.   
 Disconnect electrical appliances.  DO NOT touch electrical equipment if wet or standing 
in water.  
If persons must leave classrooms or offices, remember these evacuation tips:  
 DO NOT walk through moving water.  
 Six inches of moving water can make someone fall.  
 If persons must walk in water, walk where the water is not moving, and check the 
firmness of the ground in front.  
Driving Flood Facts:  
 Six inches of water will reach the bottom of most passenger cars, causing loss of control 
and possible stalling.  
 One foot of water will float many vehicles.  
 Two feet of rushing water can carry away most vehicles, including sport utility vehicles 
and pick-ups.  
After a Flood The following are guidelines for the period following a flood:  
 Listen for news reports to learn whether the community’s water supply is safe to drink.  
 Avoid floodwaters; water may be contaminated by oil, gasoline, or raw sewage.  
 Water may also be electrically charged from underground or downed power lines.   
242
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-16 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Stay away from downed power lines and report them to the power company.  
 Avoid moving water.  
 Be aware of areas where floodwaters have receded. Roads may have weakened and 
could collapse under the weight of a car.  
 Return to classrooms and offices only when authorities indicate it is safe.  
 Stay out of any building if it is surrounded by floodwaters.  
 Use extreme caution when entering buildings; there may be hidden damage, 
particularly to foundations.  
 Stay in contact with the principal/supervisor.  
Administrator Responsibilities:  
 Office staff to monitor the NOAA radio.  
 Upon activation, office staff shall notify the administrator -in-charge and the District 
Office.  
 Administrator should monitor developing weather conditions.  
 If conditions warrant protective measures to be taken, order students/staff to proceed 
to the shelter area.  
 If there is a medical emergency, utilize the RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9-1-1.  
 Administrator announces when students/staff are to return to their classrooms.  
 If damage has occurred to the building, the principal/administrator is to evacuate the 
affected areas/campus.  
 Discourage the release of students until the severe weather passes.  
Staff Responsibilities:  
 Upon the order to shelter-in-place the students, proceed to the shelter area.  
 Take student medication, medical devices and record/attendance books, if possible.  
 Account for all students. Report missing students to the office.  
 If there is a medical emergency, utilize the RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9-1-1.  
 Notify the principal/administrator, as soon as possible.  
 Keep students quiet and calm.  
Custodial Staff Responsibilities:  
 Monitor developing weather conditions.  
 Contact the principal/administrator for direction.  
 If conditions warrant protective measures to be taken, assist students/staff to proceed 
to the shelter area.  
 If there is a medical emergency, call 9-1-1.  
 If damage has occurred to the building, evacuate the affected areas/campus.  
 
243
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-17 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
UTILITY FAILURE  
 Purpose: This protocol is used when there is a utility failure on school property.  
 Administrator Responsibilities:  
 Contact the custodian regarding the outage.  
 Contact the maintenance department to address the problem.  
 Call the District Office.  
 Ensure that the local utility company has been contacted.  
 
Teachers and Office Staff Responsibilities:  
 Remain in the classroom. Continue to teach and keep students calm.  
 If school is dismissed early, refer to individual student emergency forms to confirm 
student destinations.  
 Make phone calls, as necessary, for alternate plans and document the change on the 
student emergency form.  
Custodial and Maintenance Staff Responsibilities:  
 Determine the full extent of the utility failure for the principal/administrator. 
 Keep the principal/administrator advised of the situation.  
CHEMICAL INCIDENT  
Purpose: This protocol is used when there is a chemical-related incident that could jeopardize 
the safety of students/staff.  
If a Chemical Incident is Suspected:  
 Identify the threat based on foreign or out-of-place substances present, within, or near 
the surroundings of the building.  
 Identify and react to the threat when emergency warning and/or alert system 
notifications are made.  
 Identify the threat based on unusual or sizable amounts of sickness -related symptoms 
being experienced by students and faculty.  
 If possible, determine if the source of the chemical threat originates within or outside 
of the building.  
 If a threat is deter mined inside the building, conduct evacuation procedures to an 
upwind assembly area outside.  
 If a threat is determined outside the building:  
 
 
244
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-18 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
o Shelter-in-place as far from the source of the contamination as possible, while 
providing the best means of protection for students/staff and limiting exposure 
time.  
o Close all doors and windows and cover any gaps between doorways with a wet 
towel or similar means of obstruction.  
o If evacuation is necessary, ensure it is done with controlled routes, guiding 
students and faculty as far from the contaminated area as possible, accounting 
for wind direction and distance.  
 Additional measures should be made for transportation of students and faculty once 
accountability has been completed.  
 Ensure the segregation of pote ntially contaminated persons or those showing 
symptoms, to avoid cross contamination.  
 Symptoms may not be present immediately and are dependent on exposure time and 
toxicity. Chemical agents DO NOT produce a visible cloud.  
 Symptoms may include:   
o Fever, headache, chills, sweating, weakness, and fatigue.  
o Blisters or rashes.   
o Unexplained coughing, fatigue, tearing in eyes, and dizziness.  
o Unusual liquid droplets or oily film.   
o Unexplained animal sickness or death.   
o Unexplained odors.   
o Respiratory distress, difficulty talking, or eating.   
o Nausea.   
Administrator Responsibilities:  
 Utilize RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9-1-1. 
 Determine best evacuation route and location, if applicable.  
 Notify students/staff to immediately move to the designated assembly area(s), account 
for the students/staff and be prepared to evacuate off-campus to a relocation site.  
 Maintain a closed campus until evacuation or decontamination procedures are 
implemented by incident commander.  
 Assist and ensure evacuation is completed.  
 Notify transportation department to stop all in -bound buses and redirect them to 
designated sites.  
 Notify the District Office.  
 Conduct attendance audit of students/staff and visitors.  
245
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-19 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Monitor public announcement through local emergency manager or broadcast media.  
Teachers and Office Staff Responsibilities:  
 If a chemical attack or release is suspected, notify the District Office and 
principal/administrator immediately.  
 Advise of injuries and/or anyone in immediate danger.  
 If evident, notify principal's office of adverse physical symptoms present.  
 Notify students in classroom to line up accordingly and proceed to the nearest hazard 
free exit in an orderly fashion, if applicable. 
 Close windows and doors.  
 Have students cover nose and mouth with any fabric material.  
 Ensure that students DO NOT chew gum, eat, drink, or place objects in their mouth.  
 In the event of an evacuation, follow the evacuation procedures:   
 Take student medication, medical devices and record/attendance books, if possible.  
o Close the classroom door.  
o Re-assemble students at the designated area.   
o Take attendance.   
o Report missing student(s) as soon as possible to the principal/administrator.   
o Await further instructions from the principal/administrator.   
o Re-occupy the building when an "All Clear" is announced.  
Custodial and Maintenance Staff Responsibilities:  
 Ensure the building is evacuated, if applicable.  
 Turn off HVAC system, if applicable.  
 If outside, assist in moving students/staff to the designated assembly area and wait for 
further instructions.  
BIOLOGICAL INCIDENT  
Purpose: This protocol is used when there is a biological-related incident that could jeopardize 
the safety of students/staff.  
If a Biological Incident is Suspected:  
 Identify the threat based on foreign or out -of-place substances present within or near 
the surroundings of the school building.  
 Identify the threat based on unusual or sizable amounts of sickness -related symptoms 
being experienced by students/staff.  
 
 
246
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-20 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 If possible, determine if the source of the biological threat originates within or outside 
of the building.  
 If a threat is determined inside the building, conduct evacuation procedures to an 
upwind assembly area outside.  
 If a threat is determined outside the building, shelter-in-place as far from the source of 
the contamination as possible, closing all doors an d windows and covering any gaps 
between doorways with a wet towel or similar means of obstruction.  
 If evacuation is necessary, ensure it is done with controlled routes, guiding 
students/staff as far from the contaminated area as possible, accounting for w ind 
direction and distance.  
 Additional measures should be made for transportation of students/staff, once 
accountability has been completed.  
 Symptoms may not present themselves for 1 -20 days, depending on the biological 
agent, and may include:  
o Fever, headache, chills, sweating, weakness, and fatigue.  
o Joint and muscle pain.  
o Respiratory distress, difficulty talking, or eating.   
o Nausea.  
 Administrator Responsibilities:  
 Utilize the RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9-1-1.  
 Determine the best evacuation route and location.  
 Notify students/staff to immediately move to the designated assembly area(s), account 
for the students/staff and be prepared to evacuate off-campus to a relocation site.  
 Assist and ensure evacuation is completed.  
 Notify the transportation department to stop all in -bound buses and redirect them to 
designated sites.  
 Notify the District Office.  
 Ensure local health department is contacted.  
 Conduct attendance audit of students/staff and visitors.  
Teachers and Office Staff Responsibilities:  
 Notify the principal/administrator.   
 Notify students in classroom to line up accordingly and proceed to the nearest hazard 
free exit in an orderly fashion.  
 Follow the evacuation procedures:  
o Take student medication, medical devices and record/attendance books, if 
possible.  
247
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-21 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
o Close the classroom door.    
o Reassemble students at the designated area.  
o Take attendance.   
o Report missing student(s) ASAP to the principal/administrator.   
o Await further instructions from the principal/administrator.   
o Re-occupy the building when an "All Clear" is announced. 
Custodial/Maintenance Staff Responsibilities:  
 Ensure the building is evacuated, if applicable.   
 If outside, assist in moving students to the designated assembly area and wait for 
further instructions.  
RADIOLOGICAL/NUCLEAR INCIDENT  
Purpose:  This protocol is used when there is a radiological or nuclear -related incident that 
could jeopardize the safety of students/staff.  
If a Radiological or Nuclear Incident is Suspected:  
 Identify the threat based on foreign or out -of-place substances present within or near 
the surroundings of the school building.  
 Identify and react to the threat based when emergency warning and/or alert system 
notifications are made.    
 Identify the threat based on unusual or sizable amounts of sickness -related symptoms 
being experienced with students/staff.  
 Hastily determine if the source of the radiological threat originates within or outside of 
the building.  
 If a threat is determined inside the buildi ng, conduct evacuation procedures to an 
upwind assembly area outside.  
 If a threat is determined outside the building:  
o Shelter-in-place as far from the source of the contamination as possible, while 
providing the best means of protection for students/staf f while limiting 
exposure time.  
o Close all doors and windows and cover any gaps between doorways with a wet 
towel or similar means of obstruction.  
 If evacuation is necessary, ensure it is done with controlled routes, guiding 
students/staff as far from the  contaminated area as possible, accounting for wind 
direction and distance.  
 Additional measures should be made for transportation of students/staff once 
accountability has been completed.  
248
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-22 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Symptoms may not present themselves for 2-6 hours, even with high doses, dependent 
on exposure time, distance, and rate. Symptoms may include:  
o  Fever, headache, chills, sweating, weakness, and fatigue.  
o Joint and muscle pain.  
o Respiratory distress, difficulty talking, or eating.   
o Nausea.  
Administrator Responsibilities:  
 Utilize RAVE Panic Button app. or call 9-1-1.  
 Determine best evacuation route and location, if applicable.  
 Notify students/staff to immediately move to the designated assembly area(s), account 
for the students/staff and be prepared to evacuate off-campus to a relocation site.  
 Maintain a closed campus until evacuation or decontamination procedures are 
implemented by incident commander.  
 Assist and ensure evacuation is completed.  
 Notify the transportation department to stop all in -bound buses and redirect them to 
designated sites.  
 Notify the District Office.  
 Ensure the local health department is contacted.  
 Conduct attendance audit of visitors and students/staff.    
 Keep exposure time to a minimum.  
 Establish a location for evacuation and decontamination at the direction/approval of 
the Site Incident Commander.  
 Contact your local emergency manager for recommendations.   
 For those buildings within the Ten Mile Emergency Planning Zone of a nuclear power 
plant, please refer to required response plans or protocols.  
 Establish information sharing system with public health officials to report 
excessive/unusual student absenteeism.   
Teachers and Office Staff Responsibilities:  
 Notify the principal/administrator.  
 Notify students in classroom to line up accordingly and proceed to the nearest hazard 
free exit in an orderly fashion, if applicable 
 Close windows and doors.  
 
 Have students cover nose and mouth with any fabric material.  
 Ensure that students DO NOT chew gum, eat, drink, or place objects in their mouth.  
 
249
Hazard-Specific Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-23 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Follow the evacuation procedures:   
o Take student medication, medical devices and record/attendance books, if 
possible.  
o Close the classroom door.    
o Reassemble students at the designated area.  
o Take attendance.   
o Report missing student(s) as soon as possible to the principal/administrator.   
o Await further instructions from the principal/administrator.   
o Re-occupy the building when an "All Clear" is announced.  
Custodians/Maintenance Staff Responsibilities:  
 Ensure the building is evacuated, if applicable.  
 Turn off HVAC system, if applicable.  
 If outside, assist in moving students to the designated assembly area and wait for 
further instruction. 
 
250
Continuity of Operations 
Plan 
Appendix F
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 
251
Continuity of Operations Plan 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-1 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Alternate School/Locations:  
 
Name of Alternate School/Location:  
 
Location 1: Boys and Girls Club of Troy 
Address: 3670 John R Rd. Troy, MI 48083  
Distance: 0.9 miles 
Point of Contact: Jim Adams, Club Director 
Phone: 248-689-1687 
Email: jimbgctroy@comcast.net 
 
Location 2: Big Beaver United Methodist Church                                                            
Address: 3753 John R Rd. Troy, MI 48083 
Distance: 0.9 miles 
Point of Contact: Pastor Gregg Mayberry 
Phone: 248-689-1932 
Email: gmayberry@bbumc.com 
 
  
  
  
                                              Barnard Elementary Order of Succession: 
 
1. Principal to Head/Lead Teacher 1 
 
2. Head/Lead Teacher 1 to Head/Lead Teacher 2 
 
3. Head/Lead Teacher 2 to Head/Lead Teacher 3 (If Applicable) 
  
                                                           Delegation of Authority: 
 
Position: Principal  
Delegates Authority To: Head/Lead Teacher 1  
Limitations: None 
Delegates Authority To: Head/Lead Teacher 2 
Limitations: None 
Delegates Authority To: Head/Lead Teacher 3 (If Applicable) 
Limitations: None 
Note: 
Positions designated for authority delegation are appointed if the primary position holder is 
temporarily unable to continue/fulfill their duties. All authority for that position passes to the 
successor, unless specified above under "Limitations.” Authorit y delegation will follow the 
order of designees unless noted. 
252
Continuity of Operations Plan 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-2 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Essential Staff Functions: 
 
Principal or District Office: 
 
 Determine when to close schools, and/or send students/staff to alternate locations. 
 Disseminate information internally to students/staff. 
 Communicate with parents/guardians, etc., media, and the larger school community. 
 Identify a line of succession, including who is responsible for restoring business 
functions for school. 
 
Principal/Assistant Principal and/or Department Heads: 
 
 Ensure systems are in place for rapid contract execution after an incident. 
 Identify relocation areas for classrooms and administrative operations. 
 Create a system for registering students (out of district or into alternative schools). 
 Brief and train staff regarding their additional responsibilities. 
 Secure and provide needed personnel, equipment/supplies, facilities, resources, and 
services required for continued operations. 
 Identify strategies to continue teaching (e.g., using the Internet, providing tutors for  
homebound students, re-arranging tests). 
 
Custodians/Maintenance Personnel: 
 
 Work with local government officials to determine when it is safe for students/staff to 
return to the school buildings and grounds. 
 Manage the restoration of school buildings and  grounds (e.g., debris removal, 
repairing, repainting and/or re-landscaping). 
 
Office Staff: 
 
 Maintain inventory. 
 Maintain essential records (and copies of records) including school’s insurance policy. 
 Ensure redundancy of records (records are kept at a different physical location). 
 Secure classroom equipment, books, and materials. 
 Restore administrative and record-keeping functions such as payroll, accounting, and 
personnel records. 
 Retrieve, collect, and maintain personnel data. 
 Provide accounts payable and cash management services. 
 
Counselors, Social Workers and Health Assistants: 
 
 Establish academic and support services for students/staff. 
253
Continuity of Operations Plan 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan F-3 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Implement additional response and recovery activities according to established 
protocols. 
 Crisis counseling. 
 
Food Service/Cafeteria/Transportation: 
 
 Determine how transportation and food services will resume. 
 
Vital Records Needed for Alternate Site Operations: 
 
Record Location 
Student Contact Information PowerSchool / Main Office Binder 
Student and Staff Medical Information Main Office 
Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) Main Office 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
254
Incident Command System  
Job Action Sheets 
Appendix G
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 
255
Incident Command System Job Action Sheets 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan G-2 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Site Incident Commander 
 Safety Officer 
 Public Information Officer 
 Operations Section Chief 
 Planning Section Chief 
 Logistic Section Chief 
 Finance/Administration Section Chief 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
256
Incident Command System Job Action Sheets 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan G-3 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Site Incident Commander 
 
Assigned to: Building Principal 
 
Mission: Will serve as the emergency lead person. Will be responsible for making all operational 
decisions in consultation with the Operations Section Chief, overseeing staff, and ensuring the 
workflow is running efficiently.  
Qualifications:  
 Good organizational skills and management experience.  
 Required ICS training.  
Equipment:  
 Cell phone and contact roster.  
 Radio.  
 Vest/Identification Badge.  
 Whistle.  
 Loudspeaker (if available).  
 Staff Roster.  
 
Immediate Duties:  
 Read this entire Job Action Sheet.  
 Put on vest and other identification.  
 Meet with the EMS for initial incident briefing.  
 Meet with the Operations Section Chief for initial briefing.  
 Establish the chain of command and performance expectations.  
 Assign specific duties. 
  
Ongoing Duties:  
 Maintain contact with EMS to provide updates on response progress.  
 Monitor other sections and identify/eliminate problem areas.  
 Receive update briefings from all section chiefs.  
 
Extended Duties:  
 Review demobilization plan as issued by the Planning Section.  
 Brief Section Chiefs on the demobilization plan.  
 Complete the After-Action Report and participate in section debriefing.  
 
 
 
257
Incident Command System Job Action Sheets 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan G-4 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Safety Officer 
 
Assigned to: District Safe-Ed Security Lead 
 
Mission: Ensure safety of all students/staff. Assess the operation for safety issues, 
instruct staff on safety procedures and implement safety measures, as needed. Has 
the authority to cease operations at any time due to safety issues. 
Qualifications:  
 Familiarity with response operations and safety procedures.  
 Training in safety and security.  
 Required ICS training.  
 
Equipment:  
 Cell phone and contact roster.  
 Vest/Identification Badge.  
 Radio.  
 
   Immediate Duties:  
 Read this entire Job Action Sheet.  
 Meet with Site Incident Commander for an initial incident briefing.  
 Establish a work location that is accessible and has adequate space.  
 Acquire necessary work materials.  
 Make recommendations on personal protection equipment, if necessary.  
 Meet with security personnel.  
 Provide orientation to the Site Incident Commander regarding all safety issues and concerns.  
 
Ongoing Duties:  
 Document all actions and decisions in an activity log.  
 Ensure all Section Chiefs have your contact information.  
 Ensure that all staff follow health and safety practices.  
 Monitor use of all personal protection equipment.  
 Provide ongoing reports to the Command Staff on safety.  
 Ensure incident/injury reports are correctly written and documented.  
 Refer distressed, upset, and anxious persons to mental health.  
 
 
258
Incident Command System Job Action Sheets 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan G-5 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Extended Duties:  
 Turn all documents in to the Documentation Unit Leader.  
 Confirm status of the school upon closure; note damage or safety issues.  
 Complete an After-Action Report and participate in the debriefing.  
 
Public Information Officer 
 
Assigned to: Director of Communications and Strategic Initiatives 
 
Mission: Provide information to the public through the news media and other 
mechanisms. 
Qualifications: 
 Familiar with local media resources. 
 Communications and public speaking skills. 
 Required ICS training. 
 Equipment: 
 Cell phone and contact roster. 
 Vest/Identification Badge. 
 Computer with printer. 
 Access to a fax machine. 
 Media packets. 
Immediate Duties: 
 Read this entire Job Action Sheet. 
 Put on vest and identification. 
 Meet with Site Incident Commander for an initial incident briefing. 
 Establish a work location that is accessible and has adequate space away from response 
operations. 
 Acquire necessary work materials. 
 Inform the media of the response operations and media protocols. 
 Prepare media packets. 
Ongoing Duties: 
 Document all actions and decisions in an Activity Log. 
259
Incident Command System Job Action Sheets 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan G-6 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Ensure all Section Chiefs have your contact information and media protocol. 
 Conduct press briefings. 
 Maintain contact with EMS and the Site Incident Commander. 
 Notify media of important information. 
 Expose and correct rumors and incorrect information. 
 Monitor media outlets for accuracy of information being reported. 
Extended Duties: 
 Conduct follow-up press briefings and releases. 
 Turn all documents in to the Documentation Unit. 
 Complete an After-Action Report and participate in the debriefing. 
Operations Section Chief 
 
Assigned to: Director of Maintenance and Operations 
 
Mission: Organize and direct aspects relating to the Operations Section. Carry out directives of 
the Site Incident Commander. Coordinate and supervise all units of the Operations Section. 
Qualifications: 
 Familiarity with response operations. 
 Good communications skills. 
 Good organizational skills and management experience. 
 Required ICS training. 
Equipment: 
 Cell phone and contact roster. 
 Radio. 
 Vest/Identification badge. 
 Staff and student rosters. 
 Loudspeaker/bullhorn. 
 Clipboard. 
Immediate Duties: 
 Read this entire Job Action Sheet. 
 Meet with Site Incident Commander for an initial incident briefing. 
 Establish a work location that is accessible and has adequate space. 
260
Incident Command System Job Action Sheets 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan G-7 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Acquire necessary work materials. 
 Brief all Section Chiefs. 
Ongoing Duties: 
 Obtain needed supplies with assistance of the Logistics Section. 
 Track and maintain awareness of incident expansions/contractions due to changes in 
conditions. 
 Determine additional resources needed. 
 Document all actions and decisions in a Section Activity Log. 
 Anticipate staff needs and request more staff, if needed for each section. 
 Provide updates on response operations to the Planning Section Chief and Site Incident 
Commander. 
Extended Duties: 
 Ensure all records and reports are turned in to the correct Section Chief. 
 Consult with Liaison Officer, Demobilization Unit Leader, and Planning Section Chief for 
release priorities. 
 Complete an After-Action Report and participate in the debriefing. 
Planning Section Chief 
 
Assigned to: Elementary: Head-Lead Teacher / Secondary: Assistant Principal 
 
Mission: Organize and direct all aspects of Planning Section operations. Ensure the distribution of 
critical information/data. Compile scenario/resource projections from all section chiefs and effect 
long range planning. Document and distribute school Action Plan.  
Qualifications:   
 Familiar with the County EOP and school EOP.  
 Ability to write Incident Action Plans.  
 Good organizational skills and management experience.  
 Required ICS training.   
Equipment: 
 Cell phone and contact roster. 
 Radio.  
 Vest/Identification badge.  
 Computer with printer.  
261
Incident Command System Job Action Sheets 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan G-8 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Access to a fax machine.  
Immediate Duties:  
 Read this entire Job Action Sheet.  
 Meet with Site Incident Commander for an initial incident briefing.  
 Establish a work location that is accessible and has adequate space.  
 Acquire necessary work materials.  
 Brief section and hand out job action sheets.  
 Develop the length of operational periods and start times for operational periods. 
 Develop a Section Action Plan.  
Ongoing Duties:  
 Look at resources, location, and status (on-scene and ordered in).  
 Consider need for additional resources.  
 Receive activity reports from Section Chiefs during each operation period.  
 Provide status reports to the Site Incident Commander.  
 Develop Incident Action Plans for each operational period.  
 Provide the Incident Action Plans to the Site Incident Commander.  
 Document all actions and decisions in a Section Activity Log.  
Extended Duties:  
 Be alert for excess resources for reassignment or demobilization.  
 Present list of resources proposed for demobilization to the Site Incident Commander.   
 Demobilize resources as approved by the Site Incident Commander.  
 Provide input to the Demobilization Unit Leader who develops the Demobilization Plan as 
needed.  
 Complete an After-Action Report and participate in the debriefing.  
 
Logistics Section Chief 
      
Assigned to: Director of Maintenance and Operations / Director of Food Service 
 
 
Mission: Organize and direct those operations associated with maintenance of the physical 
environment, and adequate levels of food, shelter, and supplies to support the organization’s 
objectives. 
Qualifications:   
 Familiar with logistic and supply operations.  
262
Incident Command System Job Action Sheets 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan G-9 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Communications skills.  
 Good organizational skills and management experience.  
 Required ICS training.   
Equipment:  
 Cell phone and contact roster.  
 Radio.  
 Vest/Identification badge.  
 Computer with printer.  
 Access to a fax machine. 
Immediate Duties:  
 Read this entire Job Action Sheet.  
 Meet with Site Incident Commander for an initial incident briefing.  
 Establish a work location that is accessible and has adequate space.  
 Acquire necessary work materials.  
 Brief section and hand out job action sheets.  
 
 Establish incident ordering process and ensure all Sections are aware of the process. 
 Develop a Section Action Plan.  
 
Ongoing Duties:  
 Obtain needed supplies with assistance of the Finance/Administration Section Chief. 
 Track and maintain awareness of incident expansions/contractions due to changes in 
conditions.  
 Determine additional resources needed.  
 Anticipate staff needs and request more staff, if needed for each Section.  
 Document all actions and decisions in a Section Activity Log. 
 
Extended Duties:  
 Supervise the break down and repackaging of equipment and supplies.  
 Arrange to have all equipment and supplies returned to place of origin and state of 
readiness.  
 Ensure Operations Center is cleaned and returned to former operating condition.  
 Provide a final list of material used to the Site Incident Commander.  
 Complete an After-Action Report and participate in the debriefing.  
 
263
Incident Command System Job Action Sheets 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan G-10 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Finance/Administration Section Chief 
 
Assigned to: Assistant Superintendent of Business Services 
 
 
Mission:  Monitor the utilization of financial assets. Oversee the acquisition of supplies and services 
necessary to carry out the organization’s overall mission. Supervise the documentation of 
expenditures relevant to the emergency incident.  
Qualifications:   
 Strong finance background.  
 Familiar with state and federal reimbursement procedures.  
 Good organizational skills and management experience.   
 Required ICS training.   
 
Equipment:  
 Cell phone and contact roster.  
 Radio.  
 Vest/Identification Badge.  
 Computer.  
 Access to a fax machine.  
 Required forms.  
Immediate Duties:  
 Read this entire Job Action Sheet.  
 Put on vest and identification.  
 Meet with Site Incident Commander for an initial incident briefing.  
 Establish a work location that is accessible, has adequate space, is close to Logistics, and has 
communications capability.  
 Acquire necessary work materials.  
 Brief Section and hand out job action sheets.  
 Develop a Section Action Plan.  
Ongoing Duties:  
 Determine funding sources for the incident.   
 Identify avenues for claim processing.  
 Track and stay aware of incident expansion/contraction due to changes in conditions. 
264
Incident Command System Job Action Sheets 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan G-11 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 Collect needed data from other Sections.  
 Develop cost summary report for the Site Incident Commander.  
 Provide Logistics Section with a list of supplies to be replenished.  
 Ensure all personnel and equipment time records are accurately completed and 
transmitted.  
 Document all actions and decisions in a Section Activity Log.  
Extended Duties:  
 Provide final financial report to the Site Incident Commander.  
 Turn all documents into the Documentation Unit. □ Complete an After-Action Report and 
participate in the debriefing.  
 
265
Resource Inventory 
Appendix H
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 
266
Resource Inventory 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan H-1 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Resource/Material Location/Source 
Two-Way Radios Main Office 
First Aid Supplies Main Office 
Fire Extinguishers Throughout Hallways and Mechanical 
Rooms 
Relocation Supply Kits Main Office 
267
Relocation Kit Supplies 
Checklist 
Appendix I 
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 
268
Relocation Kit Checklist 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan I-1 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Relocation Kit Checklist 
 Student roster with photos and class schedules 
 Student emergency contact information 
 Medical and health records 
 Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) 
 Student and staff medications 
 Hand-held radios with chargers 
 Bullhorn/megaphone with extra batteries 
 First aid kit with instruction manual 
 Flashlight with extra batteries 
 Nitrile Gloves 
 Hand Sanitizer 
 Pens and pencils 
 Note Pads 
 Student Release Forms 
 Portable NOAA weather radio 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
269
Memorandums of 
Agreement/Understanding 
Appendix J
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 
270
Memorandums of Agreement/Understanding 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan J-1 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
Agency Resources Agreed to Provide 
Oakland County Emergency 
Management 
Supplies for Medical Point of Distribution (POD): Troy 
High School 
  
  
271
Law Enforcement Command 
Posts 
Appendix K 
Law Enforcement Command Post locations will be established by the 
Troy Police Department, pursuant to their department guidelines and 
protocol. 
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 
272
Emergency Utility Shut-Off 
Procedures 
Appendix L 
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan 
273
Emergency Utility Shut-Off Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan L-1 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Electricity 
Shut-off location: Mechanical Room in LGI Hallway 
Key location: Main Office or a Custodian 
Tools required: No Tools Required 
Instructions: Move lever to the upright position (reading OPEN on indicator) 
 
 
  
274
Emergency Utility Shut-Off Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan L-2 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Natural Gas 
Shut-off location: West/North End Exterior of Building – outside of receiving door #27 
Key location: No Key needed 
Tools required: Adjustable Wrench – Needed to Adjust Valves 
Instructions: Turn Both Valves to closed position with wrench 
 
  
275
Emergency Utility Shut-Off Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan L-3 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Water 
Shut-off location: Receiving Room 
Key location: Main Office or Custodian 
Tools required: No Tools Required 
Instructions: Close Both Gate Valves on each side of the meter (clockwise to close) 
 
 
  
276
Emergency Utility Shut-Off Procedures 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan L-4 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning (HVAC) 
Shut-off location: Mechanical Room in LGI Hallway 
Key location: Main Office or Custodian 
Tools required: No Tools Required 
Instructions: Move lever to the upright position (reading OPEN on indicator) 
 
277
Vulnerability Assessment Template 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan L-1 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
VULNERABILITY 
ASSESSMENT TEMPLATE 
Appendix M 
278
Vulnerability Assessment Template 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan L-2 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
 
 
 
 
279
Vulnerability Assessment Template 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan L-3 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
 
 
 
 
280
Vulnerability Assessment Template 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan L-4 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
 
 
 
 
281
Vulnerability Assessment Template 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan L-5 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
282
Vulnerability Assessment Template 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan L-6 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
 
 
 
 
283
Vulnerability Assessment Template 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan L-7 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
 
 
 
 
284
Vulnerability Assessment Template 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan L-8 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
 
 
285
Vulnerability Assessment Template 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan L-9 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
286
Vulnerability Assessment Template 
 
 
   
Barnard Elementary Emergency Operations Plan L-10 
   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
  
 
287
      6. A.   12.17.19 
6. A. PERSONNEL 
 CONSIDERATION:  ELEMENTARY  
New Hire 
It is recommended that the Board of Edu cation approves the issuance of a 
probationary contract to the following teacher for the 2019-2020 school year. 
Megan Murray  – 1.0 Special Education  ASD Room Teacher, Leonard   
Elementary 
RECOMMENDED ACTION:  Acceptance of the resolution below: 
SUGGESTED RESOLUTION 
 Moved by          
 Supported by         
BE IT THEREFORE RESOLVED that the Board of Education takes action to approve the 
aforementioned personnel recommendations as stated above. 
 Yes     
 No     
288
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH – NEW TEACHER 
December 17, 2019 
Megan Murray, 1.0 Special Education ASD Room Teacher, Leonard Elementary 
Educational Background:  M.S., Fort Hays State University, Hays, KS 
     May 2016 
      Major:  Educational Leadership 
B.S., Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, OH  
     May 2013 
      Major:  Mild/Moderate Intervention Specialist K-12 
    ` Professional Teaching Certificate, November 2019 
Teaching Experience:  Special Education Inclusion Teacher K-5, Sue Reynolds 
Elementary School, Augusta, GA 
      2017-2019 
Special Education Teacher Grades K-2, Central 
Elementary School., Wamego, KS 
 2014-2017 
Exceptional Children’s Teacher Grades 3-5, Overhills 
Elementary School, Spring Lake, NC 
 2013-2014 
Resident Community:  Troy, MI  
289
 8.A. 12.17.19 
8. BUSINESS 
A.  CONSIDERATION:  Bid Pack #26 – Hill, Wattles, Costello, 
Martell, IAE and Athens  
A RFP was issued to obtain competitive bids for mechanical/electrical 
upgrades and window/door replacements at Hill and Wattles Elementary 
Schools; renovation of stages at Costello, Martell and IAE ; and 
renovation work in the pool and art room at Athens High School. ; Bid 
responses were reviewed by  TSD Operations Department, TMP 
Associates, Peter Basso & Associates, Barton Malow and Michelle Kerns, 
and it is recommended the bid be awarded as stated below.  
 RECOMMENDED ACTION:  Accept the resolution below. 
SUGGESTED RESOLUTION 
 Moved by:   
 Supported by: 
 Be it therefore resolved  that the bid for bid pack 26 be awarded as 
follows and that this be approved as an expenditure of the 2016 and 2019 
Capital Projects Funds; and the Sinking Fund 
A3, A4 and AHS Pool) 
(AHS Pool) 
Seven Brothers Painting Painting $     50,743.00 
Contrast Mechanical Mechanical (Alt M1) $1,111,000.00 
Air Solutions Test & Balance (Alt. M1) $    23,500.00 
M1) 
Great Lakes Power & Lighting Electrical (Alt. M1) $   789,000.00 
Total Contract Awards  $4,046,148.00 
Contingency  $  323,691.84 
TOTAL  $4,369,839.84 
 Yes: 
 No: 
290
R & E Development  General Trades (Alt A1, A2, 
$   698,155.00 
Hewett Company Exterior Doors/Window 
$1,036,050.00 
MCMI  Temperature Controls (Alt. 
$  337,700.00 
Memorandum 
 TO:       Rick West - Asst. Superintendent - Business Services  
Operations 
 FROM:  Rob Carson – Director of Maintenance & Operations   
Department 
RE:       RFP – 9894 – Bid Pack 26 – Bond Construction   
1140 Rankin 
Troy, MI 48083 
Ph: 248.823.4050 
DATE:   November 25, 2019 
Fax: 248.823.4077 
A RFP (Bid 98 94) was issued  to obtain competitive bids for 
Mechanical/Electrical Upgrades & Window/Door Replacements  at Hill & Wattles Elementary 
Schools.  It also included renovation work of the stages to meet ADA codes at Costello, Martell 
& IAE and renovation work in the pool & art room at Athens High School.  Two categories of 
the Athens renovation require to be bid again due to an insufficient  number of bid ders 
(scaffolding & pool equipment).  There were several Alternates created in this RFP for 
consideration which are recommended for award; Alt.1 ( Bemis-Operable Gym Wall 
Replacement), Alt.2 (Costello -Operable Stage Wall Replacement), Alt.3 (Martell -Operable 
Stage Wall R eplacement), Alt.4 (Operable Stage Wall Replacement), Alt.M1 (Hill -Roof Top 
HVAC Unit replacement), Alt. Athens Pool (existing window renovation & steel).  A Bid 
Summary and Contract Award Recommendation from the Barton Malow Company is attached.     
The following vendors are recommended as low qualified bid for their category. 
Category                  Contractor       Amount 
060000 General Trades  R&E Development (Alt. A1, A2, A3, A4 & AHS Pool)  $   698,155.00 
080000 Exterior Drs/Window Hewett Company (AHS Pool)     $1,036.050.00 
090000 Painting    Seven Brothers Painting      $     50,743.00 
230000 Mechanical    Contrast Mechanical (Alt. M1)    $1,111,000.00 
230000 Test & Balance  Air Solutions (Alt. M1)      $     23,500.00 
230900 Temperature Controls MCMI (Alt. M1)      $   337,700.00 
260000 Electrical    Great Lakes Power & Lighting (Alt. M1)    $   789,000.00 
     Total Contract Awards     $4,046,148.00 
       Contingency 8%   $   323,691.84 
TOTAL AWARD VALUE   $4,369,839.84 
All proposals were reviewed and qualified by the Bond Team of TMP Associates, Peter Basso 
& Associates, Michelle Kerns and Barton Malow.  A separate Purchase Order will be issued for 
each Bid Category.  The funding for these  purchases will be from the 2016 and 2019 Capital 
Projects Funds, and Sinking Fund. 
If you have any questions, please let me know.  
Cc:  Purchasing Department – File  
Atts:  Bid Summary, Barton Malow Contract Award Recommendation  
291
                Barton Malow Company 
                                                                                                    26500 American Drive – Southfield, Michigan  48034 – p 248.436.5000  
November 25, 2019 
Mr. Rick West, Assistant of Business Services 
Troy School District 
1140 Rankin 
Troy, MI  48083 
Re: 2013 Bond Program, Series 2 - Bid Package 26:  Hill and Wattles Elementary School 
MEP upgrades, Costello, Martell and IAE ADA stage modifications, Boulan and Larson door and 
window replacements, Athens High Schools pool and fine arts renovations  
BP 26 - Contract Award Recommendations 
Dear Mr. West: 
Proposals were received on November 1, 2019 for Bid Package 26- Hill and Wattles Elementary School 
MEP upgrades, Costello, Martell and IAE ADA stage modifications, Boulan and Larson door & window 
replacements, and Athens High School pool and fire arts renovations.  The swimming pool equipment and 
scaffolding scope of work will be rebid in December 2019 and awarded in January 2020, due to not 
receiving an adequate number of bids on bid day.  A summary of the bids received for BP26 is attached.  
Post bid interviews are complete.  Bid pricing received including selected alternates is within bond 
budgets assigned for each building. 
We received the proposals and qualifications of apparent low bidders, and recommend contracts be 
awarded as follows: 
Category    Contractor       Amount 
06000 General Trades/Carpentry R&E Development (Alt A1, A2, A3, A4, Ath Pool) $   698,155.00 
080000 Exterior Doors/Windows Hewett  Company (Ath Pool alt)   $1,036,050.00  
090000 Painting/Natatorium Paint Seven Bros.     $     50,743.00 
230000 Mechanical   Contrast Mechanical (Alt M1)   $1,111,000.00 
230000 Test & Balance   Air Solutions (Alt M1)    $     23,500.00 
230900 Temperature Controls  MCMI (Alt. M1)     $   337,700.00 
260000 Electrical   Great Lakes Power & Lighting (Alt. M1)   $   789,000.00 
     Total Contract Awards   $ 4,046,148.00 
     Contingency of 8%    $    323,691.84 
     Total Award Value    $ 4,369,839.84 
Included with this award recommendation is a tabulation spreadsheet of bids received on November 1, 
2019 for BP 26.   
Please contact me should you have any questions. 
Sincerely, 
Christa Amalio 
BMC Project Manager 
Attachment:  Bid Tabulation  
cc:  Mr. Robert Carson – TSD 
       Mrs. Michelle Kerns 
292
BP26 ‐ Troy Schools ‐ Bid Tabulation
Bid Category General Trades Hill Wattles Athens Costello Martell IAE Bo ulan  Larson Alt A1 Alt A2 Alt A3 Alt A4 Alt M1 Alt P1 Alt P2 Athens Poo l Total with Alternates
R&E 488,975.00 $          43,870.00 $       45,750.00 $       183,275.00 $      81,299.00 $    83,619.00 $       49,912.00 $       625.00 $             625.00 $            33,700.00$        20,900.00 $     20,900.00 $    20,900.00 $     112,780.00 $   698,155.00 $                        
HMC 639,000.00 $          76,000.00 $       89,500.00 $       1,690,000.00$   90,500.00 $    90,500.00 $       110,000.00$     7,000.00 $          6,500.00 $         43,500.00 $        24,000.00 $     24,000.00 $    22,000.00 $     132,000.00 $  
Bid Category
Ext Alum Doors 
and Hardware Hill Wattles Athens Costello Martell IAE Boulan  Larson Alt  A1 Alt A2 Alt A3 Alt A4 Alt M1 Alt P1 Alt P2 Athens Pool
Hewett 1,006,820.00 $      10,193.00 $       174,474.00 $     22,163.00 $        399,995.00 $      399,995.00 $     29,230.00$      1,036,050.00 $                    
Enviro Glass 1,184,900.00 $      4,800.00 $         199,400.00$     23,300.00 $        478,700.00 $      478,700.00 $     27,250.00$     
Rochester Glass 1,252,341.00$      9,025.00 $         210,870.00$     22,700.00 $        504,873.00 $      504,873.00 $     22,243.00$     
Bid Category Swimming Pool Hill Wattles Athens Costello Martell IAE Bou lan  Larson Alt A1 Alt A2 Alt A3 Alt A4 Alt M1 Alt P1 Alt P2 Athens Pool
Only one bid received ‐ 
bid category not opened
Bid Category Scaffolding Hill Wattles Athens Costello Martell IAE Boula n  Larson Alt A1 Alt A2 Alt A3 Alt A4 Alt M1 Alt P1 Alt P2 Athens Pool
No bids received
Bid Category  Painting Hill Wattles Athens Costello Martell IAE Boulan  Larson Alt A1 Alt A2 Alt A3 Alt A4 Alt M1 Alt P1 Alt P2 Athens Pool
F&P Painting 39,000.00 $            7,000.00 $         5,400.00 $         13,000.00 $        5,300.00 $      5,300.00 $         3,000.00 $         21,945.00$      Missing Scope ‐ not recommended
Seven Bros 50,743.00 $            830.00 $            46,076.00 $        1,505.00 $      1,529.00 $         803.00 $             50,743.00$                          
Paint Plus 198,134.00 $          1,000.00 $         5,376.00 $         169,727.00$      4,347.00 $      4,347.00 $         4,347.00 $         4,495.00 $          4,495.00 $         1,400.00 $          900.00 $           900.00 $          900.00 $          10,832.00 $     
Bid Category Mechanical  Hill Wattles Athens Costello Martell IAE Boula n  Larson Alt A1 Alt A2 Alt A3 Alt A4 Alt M1 Alt P1 Alt P2 Athens Pool Hi ll wall sleeves
Goyette 171,940.00 $          170,500.00 $     Incomplete Bid ‐ not recommended
IPP 916,840.00 $          676,502.00 $     112,766.00 $     112,784.00 $      9,576.00 $         70,031.00$      (16,200.00) $         Not Recommended 
Contrast 1,054,000.00 $      744,000.00 $     162,000.00 $     132,000.00 $      6,000.00 $         57,000.00$      (19,000.00) $         1,111,000.00$                    
Conti Corp 1,172,493.00 $      818,103.00 $     152,559.00 $     178,417.00 $      15,574.00 $       78,245.00$      (12,000.00) $        
Miller Bolt 1,192,900.00 $      926,250.00 $     150,000.00 $     92,500.00 $        18,750.00 $       88,800.00$      (15,000.00) $        
Great Lakes Mechanical 1,216,450.00$      891,000.00 $     152,000.00 $     156,000.00 $      12,000.00 $       93,000.00$      (16,000.00) $        
Ecker Mechanical 1,239,000.00$      836,300.00 $     199,800.00 $     191,100.00 $      11,800.00 $       87,300.00$      (21,600.00) $        
CSM Mechanical 1,256,700.00$      872,000.00 $     181,100.00 $     175,450.00 $      23,300.00 $    89,900.00$      (29,400.00) $        
Bid Category Test and Balance Hill Wattles Athens Costello Martell IAE Boulan  Larson Alt A1 Alt A2 Alt A3 Alt A4 Alt M1 Alt P1 Alt P2 Athens P ool
Air Solutions 21,500.00 $            17,500.00 $       1,000.00 $         2,000.00 $          1,000.00 $         2,000.00$        23,500.00$                          
ITB 67,500.00 $            39,000.00 $       16,100.00 $       6,200.00 $          6,200.00 $         2,500.00$       
Bid Category Temperature Cont r Hill Wattles Athens Costello Martell IAE Boulan  Larson Alt A1 Alt A2 Alt  A3 Alt A4 Alt M1 Alt P1 Alt P2 Athens Pool
MCMI 297,800.00 $          248,200.00 $     49,600.00 $       39,900.00$      337,700.00$                        
Bid Category  Electrical Hill Wattles Athens Costello Martell IAE Boula n  Larson Alt A1 Alt A2 Alt A3 Alt A4 Alt M1 Alt P1 Alt P2 Athens Pool
Great Lakes Power & Light 787,000.00$          203,000.00 $     307,000.00 $     245,000.00 $      5,000.00 $      5,000.00 $         22,000.00 $       2,000.00$        789,000.00$                        
Metro Electric 873,900.00 $          257,000.00 $     328,000.00 $     258,000.00 $      4,700.00 $      3,200.00 $         23,000.00 $       3,000.00$       
Shoreview Elec 890,000.00 $          269,000.00 $     316,000.00 $     243,000.00 $      9,000.00 $      9,000.00 $         19,000.00 $       1,500.00$        4,046,148.00$    
293
8. B.     12.17.19 
8. BUSINESS 
B. CONSIDERATION:  2020 School Building and Site Bonds  
Attached is a Resolution that sets forth the School District’s intent to 
reimburse its General Fund for the cost of acquiring real property and a 
building located thereon with the proceeds of the proposed 2020 School 
Building and Site Bonds (the “2020 Bond s”). The Resolution is required 
under federal tax law to preserve the School District’s ability to reimburse 
the General Fund with future proceeds from the 2020 Bonds. The 
Resolution allows the reimbursement for any expenditure made out of the 
General Fund for the Bond Projects not-to-exceed $6,100,000. 
RECOMMENDED ACTION: Accept the resolution attached. 
Moved by:  ____________________ 
Supported by: _______________________  
THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the Board of Education of the Troy School District 
does hereby approve the attached resolution, and that this resolution, in its entirety, be 
made a part of the official minutes of the December 17, 2019 Regular meeting. 
Yes:  __________ 
No:  __________ 
294
8. B.     12.17.19 
Troy School District 
County of Oakland 
State of Michigan 
REIMBURSEMENT RESOLUTION FOR SCHOOL BUILDING AND SITE BONDS 
_________________________________ 
Minutes of a regular meeting of the Board of Education (the “Board”) of the Troy 
School District, County of Oakland, State of Michigan (the “School District”), held in the 
School District, on December 17, 2019, at 7:00 p.m., prevailing Eastern time. 
PRESENT:    Members_____________________________________________________ 
 ____________________________________________________________ 
ABSENT:      Members_____________________________________________________ 
The following preamble and resolution were offered by Member: 
___________________ and supported by Member: _________________________: 
WHEREAS, on September 17, 2019, the Board authorized the issuance of bonds in 
the aggregate principal sum of not to exceed Six Million One Hundred Thousand Dollars 
($6,100,000) (the “Bonds”) for the purposes of the acquisition of real property and a 
building located thereon and the renovation, equipping and furnishing of such building 
(the “Projects”); and 
WHEREAS, the School District intends at this time to state its intentions to be 
reimbursed from proceeds of the Bonds for any expenditures undertaken by the Sch ool 
District for the Projects prior to issuance of the Bonds. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED THAT: 
1. The School District makes the following declarations for the purpose of 
complying with the reimbursement rules of Treas. Reg. § 1.150-2 pursuant to the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended: 
(a) The School District reasonably expects to reimburse itself with 
proceeds of the Bonds for certain costs of the Projects which 
were paid or will be paid from general funds of the School 
District subsequent to sixty (60) days prior to today.  
(b) The maximum principal amount of the Bonds, including 
issuance costs, is $6,100,000. The Bonds will fund the costs 
of the Projects. 
295
8. B.     12.17.19 
(c) A reimbursement allocation of the capital expenditures 
described above with the proceeds of the Bonds will occur not 
later than 18 months after the later of (i) the date on which 
the expenditure is paid, or (ii) the date the Projects are placed 
in service or abandoned, but in no event more than three (3) 
years after the original expenditure is paid.  A reimbursement 
allocation is an allocation in writing that evidences the School 
District’s use of the proceeds of the Bonds to reimburse the 
School District for a capital expenditure made pursuant to this 
resolution. 
(d) The expenditures desc ribed in (a) above are “capital 
expenditures” as defined in Treas. Reg. § 1.1.150-1(b), which 
are any costs of a type which are properly chargeable to a 
capital account (or would be so chargeable with a proper 
election or with the application of the defini tion of placed in 
service under Treas. Reg. § 1.150-2(c)) under general Federal 
income tax principles (as determined at the time the 
expenditure is paid). 
(e) No proceeds of the borrowing paid to the School District in 
reimbursement pursuant to this Resolu tion will be used in a 
manner described in Treas. Reg. § 1.150-2(h) with respect to 
abusive uses of such proceeds, including, but not limited to, 
using funds corresponding to the proceeds of the borrowing 
in a manner that results in the creation of replace ment 
proceeds (within Treas. Reg. §  1.148-1) within one year of 
the reimbursement allocation described in (c) above. 
2. All resolutions and parts of resolutions insofar as they conflict with the 
provisions of this resolution be and the same hereby are rescinded. 
AYES:       
Members__________________________________________________________ 
_______________________________________________________________ 
NAYS:     
Members___________________________________________________________ 
[Remainder of Page Intentionally Left Blank] 
296
8. B.     12.17.19 
RESOLUTION DECLARED ADOPTED. 
________________________________ 
 Gary Hauff 
 Secretary, Board of Education 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and complete copy of a resolution 
adopted by the Board of Education of th e Troy School District, County of Oakland, at a 
regular meeting held on December 17, 2019, and that said meeting was conducted and 
public notice of said meeting was given pursuant to and in full compliance with the Open 
Meetings Act, being Act 267, Public Acts of Michigan, 1976, and that the minutes of said 
meeting were kept and will be or have been made available as required by said Act. 
________________________________ 
 Gary Hauff 
 Secretary, Board of Education 
297
