g to the proper 
authority. Such report may include suggestions to correct the condition or remove the danger of said 
condition. 
9.4 In any case, where a teacher is sued and held personally liable for injuries caused by an unhealthy 
or unsafe condition in the school building or equipment, the Board will indemnify and hold harmless 
the teacher against any damages adjudged against him or her providing the teacher had no knowledge 
of the condition or had knowledge and reported same in writing to the principal. 
9.5 Emergency procedures for the District and each building within the District shall be established 
in the event of heating, ventilation, plumbing, and/or power failures. In addition, procedures for fire, 
tornadoes and severe winter weather shall also be established on the same basis. These procedures 
shall be placed in the Teacher Handbook. 
Decisions to close the District's buildings or individual buildings shall reflect the safety and welfare of 
students and teachers and the possibility of continuing the educational program. 
In the event a building is closed due to the above-mentioned reasons, teachers will be free to leave for 
the day after students and/or buses have departed and emergency procedures have been completed. 
each building develop ed in consultation with city and county agencies.  The District will provide 
Formatted: Right:  0.22"
annual districtwide and individual building training during scheduled professional development. 
Formatted: List Paragraph, Left, Indent: Left:  0.13",
Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.19" + Indent at:  0.44"
15  
151
9.6 The District will develop and maintain a Master Emergency Operating Plan (“EOP”) tailored for 
9.7 Should a teacher be injured during the course of the workday; a teacher is required to report the 
incident to building administration and complete a provided incident report.  The teacher, at his/her 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
First line:  0.01", Right:  0.22", Outline numbered +
Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 7 +
discretion, or at the District’s encouragement, may submit to a medical evaluation pursuant to the 
Michigan Worker’s Compensation Statute.  Any absence from the workplace under the Michigan 
Worker’s Compensation Statute will not be counted against a teacher’s annual leave balance. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0", Right:  0.22"
9.8 The District will establish an intervention process for escalated student beh aviors.  A Behavior 
Formatted: List Paragraph, Left, Indent: Left:  0.13",
Support Team comprised of building and/or District staff as needed will assess the situation and will 
First line:  0", Right:  0.22", Outline numbered + Level: 2
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
The District will publish and train staff on the intervention process and procedures annually.
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0"
16  
152
establish a support process to address the student behaviors.  Staff will be trained on the established 
plan. 
+ Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 7 + Alignment:
Left + Aligned at:  0.19" + Indent at:  0.44"
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
ARTICLE 10.   PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS AND ASSIGNMENT 
Formatted: Normal, Centered, Indent: Left:  0.13",
Space Before:  0 pt
10.1 All teachers employed by the Board shall have at least a Bachelor's degree from an accredited 
college or university and be certified or authorized in accordance with current state and federal law. 
and state regulations, and not in conflict with or violation of the Master Agreement. 
ARTICLE 11.   PROFESSIONAL COMPENSATION 
11.1 Salary Schedule. The salaries of teachers covered by this Agreement are set forth in 
Schedule A. 
A. As of July 1, 2017, all eligible teachers shall move one salary step from the step that they 
were on during the 2016 -2017 school year, on  the 2017-2020 salary schedule. In addition, 
eligible teachers on Steps 2 through 13 shall receive a lump sum payment equivalent to half 
of the amount of their current step increment.  At the time of this half increment payment, 
teachers will move a half step on the salary schedule. 
B. As of July 1, 2018, all eligible teachers shall move one salary step from the step that they 
were on during the 2017 -2018 school year, on the 2017 -2020 salary schedule. In addition, 
eligible teachers who moved to Step  13.5 during the 2019 -2020 school year shall receive a 
lump sum payment equivalent to half of the amount of their current step increment. 
. 
C. As of July 1, 2019, all eligible teachers shall move one -half (1/2) salary step from the step 
that they were on during the 2018 -2019 school year, on the 2017 -2020 salary schedule. In 
addition, eligible teachers shall receive a lane adjustment or longevity, as  applicable.As of 
on the date of ratification of this agreement shall receive a lump sum payment of five-hundred 
dollars ($500.00).  This amount shall be added to the 2020 -2021 “Schedule A” Longevity 
Steps. 
Formatted: Superscript
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
D. As of July 1, 2017, Step 14 of Schedule A will increase by five-hundred dollars ($500.00) as 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
F. As of July 1, 2020, each cell of the “Schedule A” Salary Schedule (Steps 1 through 14) shall 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", Right:  0",  No bullets or
increase by five-hundred dollars ($500.00). 
numbering, Tab stops: Not at  0.74"
numbering
17  
153
10.2 All teachers shall be employed under approved individual contracts based on certification, or 
annual authorization, in accordance with the State Board of Education and in accordance with federal 
eligible teachers shall receive a lane adjustment or longevity, as applicable.As of May 1st, all 
eligible teachers shall receive a lane adjustment or longevity, as applicable.As of May 1st, all 
May 15th, all eligible teachers who began the 2019-2020 school year on Longevity 1, 2, or 3 
reflected in the 2017-2020 Salary Schedule A.As of May 15th, all teachers will receive a two-
hundred dollars ($200.00) ratification bonus. 
E. As of July 1, 2020, all eligible teachers shall move one salary step form the step that they 
were on at the end of the 2019-2020 school year, on the 2020-2021 salary schedule. 
G.  On the first pay period of the 2020-2021 school year, all teachers will receive a five-hundred 
dollar ($500.00) off schedule payment. 
D.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", First line:  0", Right: 
0.22", Widow/Orphan control
Formatted: Superscript
Formatted: Superscript
Formatted: Superscript
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", Right:  0",  No bullets or
numbering, Tab stops: Not at  0.74"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", Right:  0",  No bullets or
numbering, Tab stops: Not at  0.74"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.44", Hanging:  0.31"
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Normal, Indent: Left:  0.42",  No bullets or
11.2 Extra-duty Compensation. The salary schedule is based upon a normal weekly teaching load 
during normal teaching hours, as hereinafter defined during the life of this Agreement. For any 
additional work o r duties, the teacher shall be entitled to appropriate additional compensation, as 
provided in Schedules B, C and D. 
11.3 Holidays and Paid Vacations. The following legal holidays shall be observed, and all schools 
shall be closed: Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day,  Christmas Day, New Year's Day, Good Friday and 
Memorial Day. There shall be six (6) paid holidays: Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, 
New Year's Day, Good Friday and Memorial Day. 
11.4 School Calendar. 
A. The school calendars are set forth in Schedule E of this Agreement. For purposes of teacher 
compensation, the calendar for 2017/2018, 2018/2019, 2019/2020, shall constitute 192 days 
inclusive of the six (6) paid holidays. To insure provision of the minimum number  of days 
of student instruction as required by MCLA 388.1701, as amended from time to time, days 
of student instruction may be rescheduled and the necessary modifications to the school 
control of the Board, then instructional days shall be rescheduled to comply with MCLA 
388.1701. In order to make up canceled days, the following days of the school calendar  
18  
154
calendar will be made. 
B. In the event that pupil instructional days have been canceled due to conditions not within the 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.42", Hanging:  0.31"
Style: A, B, C, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left +
1. The teacher non-instructional day at the end of the first semester (1/2 day of student 
Aligned at:  0.42" + Indent at:  0.74"
classes; full day for teachers); 
2. The last teacher non-instructional day at the end of the second semester (1/2 day of 
student classes; full day for teachers); 
3. Add up to three (3) days to the end of the student year (full teacher/full student days) 
without additional pay. 
C. Rescheduling Required Instructional Time. 
1. If additional days of instruction must be scheduled to insure compliance with 
MCLA 388.1701 beyond those days specified in 11.4 B (1), (2) and (3), then such days 
will be scheduled at the end of the teacher school year; and teachers will be eligible for 
their daily rate of pay for such days taught. Rescheduled days in 11.4 B (3) and 
11.4 C shall be scheduled before the last three (3) half days of the student year. 
2. If minutes fall short district -wide, instructional time shall be increased on student 
half days during the current semester to avoid state aid loss, if reasonably possible. In 
other situations, the parties will negotiate before scheduling the required time. 
D. If MCLA 388.1701 is modified or repealed so as not to require the rescheduling of student 
instructional days, Section 11.4 of this Agreement shall be null and void and the following 
language shall apply: 
School Calendar. The school calendars set forth in Schedule E of this Agreement are based 
on 186 teacher days of work for 2017/2018, 2018/2019, 2019/2020 plus six (6)  paid 
holidays. The school calendar shall not be modified for the duration of this Agreement unless 
by mutual agreement. 
E. In any event teachers shall not lose pay for Act of God days as defined in MCLA 388.1701 
which the Board decides not to make up or for which the law allows not to be made up. 
according to the pay schedules in Schedule A. 
A teacher who elects the twenty-six (26) pay option may elect at the beginning of the school year to 
have the final five (5) payments in one payment on the last day of school or every two (2) week 
payments. 
During the 2017 -2018 school year only, a teacher will be require d to choose between the option of 
electing to receive his/her salary in twenty -two (22) equal payments or twenty -seven (27) equal 
payments according to the pay schedules in Schedule A. 
A teacher who elects the twenty -seven (27) pay option may elect at the  beginning of the school year 
to have the final six (6) payments in one payment on the last day of school or every two (2) week 
payments. 
19  
155
B. will be instructional days without any additional compensation to bargaining unit employees: 
11.5 Pay Periods. The teacher shall be given the option at the beginning of each school year of 
electing to receive his/her salary in twenty-one (21) equal payments or twenty-six (26) equal payments 
11.6 Compensation for Schedule B assignments shall, at the option of the teacher, be paid in a one- 
time payment upon completion of the activity, or a two-time payment, half at the midpoint of the e 
Formatted: Outline numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", First line:  0", Right: 
0.22"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", First line:  0.01", Right: 
0.21", Keep with next
 activity and the remainder upon completion of the activity for which compensation is being 
received. If the coach elects to be paid in two payments, the mid-point payment shall be issued as 
follows:  
11.6  
High School Last pay in September Last pay in January Last pay in April 
0.22", Space Before:  3.5 pt, Line spacing:  single, Keep
Winter 2: Last pay in February 
Compensation for Schedule C shall be paid in nineteen (19) consecutive payments consistent with the 
teacher's option in Section 11.5, commencing with the third payroll of the school year. Compensation 
for Schedule D shall be submitted on timesheets. 
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
deductions/direct deposits shall be transmitted to the financial i nstitution on the date of the paycheck 
Start at: 7 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.38" +
from which the deduction/direct  deposit was made. All teachers shall enroll in direct deposit to a 
Indent at:  0.67"
financial institution in the United States. 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
11.9 11.9 Paycheck Payments. The Board agrees to provide a biweekly schedule of payment to 
Formatted: Normal, Justified, Indent: Left:  0.13",  No
according to the biweekly schedule. If a pay date falls on a contractual holiday, pay checks shall be 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
issued one business day earlier. 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt, Bold
11.10 11.10 Upon written application to the Assistant Superintendent, Employee Services, the Board 
Formatted: Font: Bold
or its designee may grant days off without pay. 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
applicable state law and regulations. 
hardware prior to the required implementation.  The Board  agrees to utilize the bargained 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.44", Hanging:  0.31"
calendar when developing annual professional development sch edules, including 
Formatted: Font: Not Bold, No underline
B.C. Professional Development Activities Satisfying the Requirement: 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
1. Summer workshops provided by the Troy School District. 
Formatted: Normal,  No bullets or numbering
Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  -0.39" + Indent at:  0.11"
3. Pre-approved out -of-district workshops paid for by the District (No additional 
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0"
4. Pre-approved out of dis trict workshops paid for by the teacher (No additional 
compensation shall be paid if the workshop is on a non-workday). 
20  
156
Level Fall Sports Winter Sports Spring Sports 
Middle School Last pay in September Winter 1: Last pay in December 
First pay in May 
11.7 Retroactive Pay. All retroactive pay shall be paid on the next regular payday. 
11.8 11.8 Financial Institution Deductions/Direct Deposits. Financial institution 
the TEA prior to the beginning of the school year. Pay checks shall be issued every other Friday 
11.11 Required Teacher Professional Development Days. 
A. Required Professional Development. Teachers shall be required to complete a minimum of 
thirty (30) hours of professional development annually. It is understood and agreed that the 
minimal amount of required annual professional development shall be in accordance with 
B. The Board will provide professional development for trainings on both new software and new 
professional development sessions prior to the start of the school year and any scheduled 
nonstudent days. 
A.  
2. Martin Luther King Day Professional Development Workshop(s) in the Troy 
School District. 
compensation shall be paid if the workshop is on a non-workday). 
Formatted: Body Text, Justified, Indent: Left:  0", Right: 
with next
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13", First line:  0", Outline
bullets or numbering
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13", First line:  0", Outline
Start at: 11 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.38" +
Indent at:  0.75"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.42", Hanging:  0.31"
Formatted: Font: Not Bold, No underline
Formatted: Font: Not Bold, No underline
Formatted: Font: Not Bold, No underline
Formatted: Font: Not Bold, No underline
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Indent: Hanging:  0.49", Outline numbered
+ Level: 1 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 11 +
Formatted: Indent: Hanging:  0.49"
sessions known at that time which shall be offered to teachers after school each marking 
period. Each of these sessions shall be scheduled for at least a minimum of one (1) hour. 
The District may choose to offer additional professional development opportunities for 
which teachers may opt to attend. 
7.  All building meetings eligible for professional development which are known at 
that time will be posted for each semester prior to the beginning of the semester. 
After:  12 pt
21  
157
5. School year in-services (no guarantees to be scheduled or to attend; no guaranteed 
number of substitute days). 
6. No later than October 1, the District shall announce the professional development 
7.  
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.06", First line:  0", Right: 
0.22", Widow/Orphan control
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.06", First line:  0"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.06", First line:  0", Space
Before:  0 pt
1. The teacher must keep a record of professional development and submit the record 
to the principal for a signature by the last teacher workday of the school  year. The 
teacher will be provided with a signed copy. 
2. Staff development in-service attended between the end of the teachers’ school year 
and June 30th can be counted for either the current or successor school year. 
3. After the District announces the professional development that shall be offered to 
teachers, the teachers are to pre-register on the District’s professional development 
management system for the session prior to the day of the scheduled professional 
development event. 
4. All records of professional development including session offerings, teacher 
professional development plans, registration, and validation will be maintained on 
the District’s professional development management system. 
D.E. Validation Procedures. 
1. In lieu of a sign -in validation for attendance, teachers are to complete an online 
validationsurvey through the District’s professional development management 
system after they have attended the professional development session. 
(State Continuing Education Clock Hours), all staff will be required to follow the 
state process for validation of all professional learning clock hours. 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
F. Professional Learning. 
Formatted: Normal,  No bullets or numbering
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.86" +
c. The presenters modeled effective questioning strategies and facilitation techniques to 
Formatted: Outline numbered + Level: 4 + Numbering
to implement the new content and/or skills. 
e. I feel confident in my ability to implement the new knowledge or skills gained in this 
offering in my current position. 
f. Three specific ways I might implement the new knowledge or skills gained in my 
current position. 
 Response prompts #1 -#5 (a-e above) will have blanks for multiple choice responses 
that reflect a degree of agreement with each statement including a “not applicable” 
22  
158
C.D. Recordkeeping. 
2.  As the State of Michigan transitions all professional learning credit to SCECH’s 
The survey will consist of the following response prompts: 
1. Five (5) half days per year may be allowed for in -service training, workshops, 
curriculum studies, etc., not including special days as listed in the calendar. 
2. The District shall make in-service training on special education issues available to 
teachers prior to the beginning of the school year. 
a. The intended outcomes, as described for this offering, were accomplished. 
b. The offering was organized so I had time to reflect on what I learned. 
enhance my learning of content and/or skills. 
d. The offering was organized so I had time to collaborate with colleagues and plan how 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.42", Hanging:  0.31", Space
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.13", Hanging:  0.19"
Formatted: Space After:  12 pt
Formatted: No underline
Formatted: Space After:  12 pt
Formatted: List Paragraph, Indent: Left:  1.13", Outline
numbered + Level: 4 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Indent at:  1.11"
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Style: 1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned
at:  0.86" + Indent at:  1.11"
response. Additionally, response #6 (f) seeks a short phrase response to the following: 
2. All responses to the survey will be used to validate attendance only; any information 
gathered from the surveys will be used only for informational purposes by the  
District. 
3. The parties recognize the mutual benefits for the teachers and Distri ct from 
receiving survey feedback as soon as possible following any professional 
development session. Accordingly, all participants are encouraged to complete the 
survey process in a timely manner. Within each of the four (4) marking periods, if 
the professional development session occurs before progress reports are due, 
23  
159
teachers have until the end of that marking period to complete the survey. If the 
professional development session occurs after a progress reporting date, teachers 
have until the end of the following marking period to complete their surveys for 
validation of professional development attendance. Validations must be completed 
prior to the end of the school year. 
4. The parties also recognize the mutual benefits for the teachers and District to 
provide professional development which meets the Michigan Department of 
Education (MDE) requirements for District -Provided Professional Developments 
(DPPD) that might be utilized for the purpose of teacher certificate renewal. While 
the ultimate determination of what professional development activities/sessions 
qualifies as DPPD is within the authority of MDE to decide, the District will take 
steps to identify the activities/sessions it believes should qualify for t his purpose 
within the District’s professional development management system. Further, the 
parties recognize that voluntary response prompts will be provided (in addition to 
those identified in subsection 2 above) for teachers to utilize within the validat ion 
process as a means of supporting that the identified activities/sessions should 
qualify as DPPD. Nonetheless, despite the District’s efforts to support teachers in 
their possible use of completed professional development activities/sessions as 
DPPD for  teacher certificate renewal, the parties again recognize this final 
determination is within the exclusive authority of MDE. 
ARTICLE 12. TEACHING HOURS 
12.1 Teaching Hours. Starting and closing times of individual schools will be determined by the 
Board after due consideration of all relevant factors. These times shall be determined by August  first 
of each year, and the TEA shall be so notified. 
The total length of a teacher's workday shall not exceed seven (7) hours and ten (10) minutes per day. 
The workday shall be continuous except as provided for elsewhere in this Agreement. Rotation of late 
school schedule will be referred to the Professional Relations Committee. 
The District agrees that no District or building level meetings will be scheduled the last three hours of 
the first teacher workday. 
12.2 Teachers will be required to be at their designated workstations at least five (5) minutes before 
the designated starting time of the first class in the secondary schools. The reporting and dismissal time 
before and after classes will be determined by a vote of the staff at a faculty meeting in the beginning 
of  each   school year.   In each building teachers (general and special education 
classroom teachers, media specialists and reading teachers) may vote to select one of the following 
options for reporting and dismissal times: 
 High Schools  
Reporting Time before  Dismissal Time after 
  Start of Student Day   Close of Student Day 
10 minutes  12 minutes 
12 minutes  10 minutes 
 Middle Schools  
Reporting Time before  Dismissal Time after 
  Start of Student Day  Close of Student Day 
10 minutes  20 minutes 
15 minutes  15 minutes 
20 minutes  10 minutes 
 Elementary Schools  
Reporting Time before  Dismissal Time after 
24  
160
  Start of Student Day  Close of Student Day 
8 minutes *  8 minutes 
25  
161
the approval of their principal, may leave earlier or arrive later than the designated times. 
Formatted: Justified
* The Early-Elementary report time shall be three (3) minutes on all early release professional learning 
days. 
12.3 The TEA encourages teachers to remain for a sufficient period after the close of the pupils' 
school day to attend to those matters which properly require attention at that time. 
12.4 Preparation for classroom teaching, building meetings, assigned non -teaching duties, 
extracurricular activities which are not covered by extra compensation, curriculum and other required 
professional committee meetings, exclusive of TEA meetings, are recognized as examples of 
professional responsibilities falling within the work week and/or day. 
12.5 On Fridays and days immediately preceding school holidays and vacations, the teachers'  day 
shall end at the close of the pupils' school day, except that the teachers should remain in the building 
until the buses have left the school grounds. Teachers involved in scheduled TEA meetings shall be 
excused at the end of the pupils' school day, except that this practice shall not apply to more than five 
(5) days when the entire TEA membership is involved. 
12.6 Elementary Preparation Time. The Board agrees to provide a weekly minimum of two 
hundred twenty-five (225) minutes of preparation and conference time for all elementary teachers. 
Planning time for classroom teachers (including kindergarten) will be scheduled in segments of at least 
twenty-five (25) minutes each day whenever possible, but will be guaranteed at least 25 minutes each 
day 4 days a week, unless the teacher agrees otherwise. Planning time for special teachers (art, music, 
physical education, media, Spanish, ESL, etc.) will be scheduled to provide a minimum of three (3) 
twenty-five (25) minute segments. Remaining planning time will be scheduled in segments of not less 
than fifteen (15) minutes. The District will make an effort to limit the number of sections per week for 
specials teachers to fifty (50). 
12.7 On student half days, the class schedules shall be alternated to provide an equalization of 
teacher planning time. 
12.8 Elementary Specials Block Schedule. 
before/after school when impacted by seven-section days. 
building impacted by the seven -section schedule. If the teacher el ects to schedule a half -day 
management day, every effort shall be made to partner with another specials teacher eligible for the 
management days. Scheduling of these days must follow current contract language regarding 
scheduling of management days per Article 6.5. 
band/orchestra class.  Band/orchestra teachers will not be responsible for the set -up and breakdown 
of the classroom. 
26  
162
The selected option shall remain in effect for one entire school year. On a given day, teachers, with 
The district will make every effort to provide elementary specials teachers access to their classroom 
Elementary specials teachers impacted by seven -section days will be provided one  two half-day 
management days per quarter or one  two full-days per semester. These days must be used in the 
The TSD will ensure that band/orchestra room set -up and break down will occur prior to the 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.13"
Formatted: Justified
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.11", Right:  0.27",
Widow/Orphan control
Formatted: Justified
Classrooms that are used in the evenings and mornings by sanctioned groups will be restored to their 
original set-up by the TSD. 
(i.e. K/1, 2/3, 4/5). 
27  
163
When practicable, the elementary specials schedule will be grouped according to common grade  levels 
12.9 Loss of Elementary Prep Time. 
A. If the  total of the planning time missed by a classroom teacher or a group of classroom 
teachers within a school building on a given instructional day due to a scheduled specials  
Formatted: Justified, Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0", Space After:  12 pt
Formatted: Space After:  12 pt, Keep with next, Keep
lines together
Keep lines together
submission of a completed timesheet. 
B. If the total of the planning time missed by a classroom teacher or a group of classroom 
teachers within a school building on a given instructional day due to a scheduled specials 
period not taking place because of the lack of a substitute teacher is greater than ninety (90) 
minutes, then the impacted classroom teacher(s) will be provided with substitute teacher 
coverage to allow him/her/them to make-up the missed planning time. A concerted effort will 
be made by the building principal to arrange for this substitute teacher coverage within five 
(5) working days from the date the planning time is missed. 
C. Where the planning time is missed due to the absence of a specials teacher arising after the 
specified time for reporting a daily absence, then the specials teacher whose absence led to 
the missed planning time of the other teacher(s) will need to create a lesson plan that can be 
used by the substitute teacher for the purpose of (B) above. 
D. Where the planning time is missed due to th e appropriately-reported absence of a specials 
teacher because a substitute teacher for the specials teacher was either not secured or re - 
assigned by the District to cover another teacher absence, then the lesson plans to be used by 
the substitute teacher for the purpose of #2 above will be drawn from a common bank of 
specials lesson plans which will be developed be two (2) specials teachers within each 
specials area. This common bank of specials lesson plans will be maintained on the District’s 
electronic shared folder, and a paper copy will be maintained at each elementary building. 
The specials teachers who develop these lesson plans will be paid for this work  at the 
curriculum rate of pay (Schedule D) for a maximum of three (3) hours. 
12.10 Staff M ember Death. Whenever a teacher or principal dies, the District shall provide 
substitutes for up to 80% of the teachers requiring substitutes in the affected building to permit  those 
teachers to attend the funeral. In buildings where more than twenty -four (24) teachers require 
substitutes, and more than 20 substitutes are needed, the District will provide at least twenty (20) 
substitutes, and will make a good faith effort to obtain additional substitutes. Persons in other buildings 
wishing to attend said funeral will request permission from the building principal. Permission will be 
granted, as long as substitutes are available without time loss from leave days. 
12.11 Lunch Period, Elementary. All elementary teachers shall be guaranteed a duty -free, 
uninterrupted lunch period of forty (40) minutes per day. In the event a teacher has not had a forty - 
(40-) minute lunch period, he/she shall be excused immediately after school by the principal. Teachers 
are not required to stay in the building during their lunch period. 
leave the building. 
12.13 12.13 Elementary Recess Procedure. The standard procedure shall be a fifteen (15) minute 
morning and fifteen- (15) minute afternoon recess, but an individual school may choose to alter this 
28  
164
A. period not taking place because of the lack of a substitute teacher is ninety (90) minutes or 
less, then the impacted teacher(s) will be paid for the missed planning time at the appropriate 
prorated hourly rate for teaching in place of a substitute teacher (Schedule D) upon 
12.12 Lunch Period, Secondary. Secondary teachers shall have a duty -free lunch period at least 
equal to that of the students or twenty-five (25) minutes, whichever is greater, during which they may 
Formatted: Outline numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering
Style: A, B, C, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left +
Aligned at:  0.49" + Indent at:  0.74", Keep with next,
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", First line:  0", Right: 
0.21", Space After:  12 pt
by agreement of staff and principal. Recess period does not apply for th e morning or afternoon that a 
particular class has physical education instruction, except in those cases where a teacher believes it  
29  
165
to be in the best educational interests of his/her students. In this situation, the individual teachers shall supervise 
their own recess period. 
A rotational duty schedule will be arranged so that teachers will supervise a minimum of two (2) classes 
at one time. Teachers may volunteer to take their own classes to recess and, therefore, will not  be 
placed in the rotational schedule. A teacher who is not supervising recess shall not be assigned any 
other duty at that time. 
school improvement and general faculty meetings are a necessary and integral part of the professional 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
duties of teachers. Up to a maximum of two (2) hours per month may be used for such meetings. One 
bullets or numbering
Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) in conjunction with the building principal or building supervisor. 
The remaining one (1) hour per month shall be reserved for general faculty meetings. 
During the continuous improvement review process, up to one (1) hour of the two (2) allocated hours 
for general faculty or collaboration meetings may be used per marking period for the continuous 
improvement review process. During the year of an external visitation, up to one (1) additional  hour 
per month may be  used exclusively for NCA visitation activities. Every effort will be made not to 
schedule meetings on designated half -day workdays, on two consecutive days, on Fridays, or days 
preceding a vacation, recess, or holiday period. 
Attendance at faculty meeting s is required following the posting or distribution to all teachers of a 
tentative agenda including an approximate ending time at least twenty -four (24) hours prior to the 
meeting. If it is necessary for a teacher to be excused from a properly announced me eting, it shall be 
the responsibility of the teacher to obtain the information covered at the meeting. 
include individual student support meetings.  These individual student meetings are defined as 
meetings to support student success.  Referring a student to MTSS, or meeting with colleagues and/or 
parents are examples of an individual student support meetings that may fall outside of the contractual 
workday.  Teachers will not be required to atte nd more than six (6) meetings over the course of the 
school year.  These meetings shall not exceed thirty (30) minutes in duration.  Should it be necessary 
for a teacher to attend more than six (6) individual student support meetings during the school year, 
the teacher will fill out a time sheet and be compensated at the schedule D rate ($30 per hour).  These 
meetings are not building or staff meetings, instead these meetings are schedule to assist with an 
individual student’s unique needs. 
event of temporary workday schedule changes which result from special activities such as 
Formatted: Normal, Indent: Left:  0.13",  No bullets or
assemblies and homerooms. In the event a scheduled special activity is canceled or rescheduled, all 
numbering, Tab stops:  0.13", Left + Not at  0.61"
teachers shall be notified immediately. 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
social workers shall be allowed to adjust their workday so as to provide compensatory time for 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
meetings with parents outside of their normal day. 
ARTICLE 13. CLASS SIZE 
13.1 Teaching Loads and Assignments, Elementary (K-5). 
A. It is recognized by the Board and the Association that the pupil-teacher ratio is an important 
aspect of an effective program. Therefore, they agree that every effort will be made to  keep 
30  
166
12.14 12.14 It is recognized by the Board and the TEA that reasonable grade level, departmental, 
(1) of the two hours per month shall be scheduled for collaboration as determined by each building’s 
12.15  To promote student success, professional responsibilities beyond the contractual workday may 
12.15 12.16  All teachers shall be informed no later than Thursday of the week preceding the 
12.16 12.17  With the approval of the special education director, school psychologists and 
Formatted: Font: Bold
Formatted: Normal, Justified, Indent: Left:  0.06",  No
Formatted: Font: Bold
Formatted: Font: Bold
Formatted: Font: Bold
class sizes at acceptable numbers as dictated by the financial conditions of the District, the 
building facilities available, and the best interests of the District as deemed administratively 
feasible. 
B. Every effort shall be made to equalize loads throughout the building at each particular grade 
level. By the second Friday of the school year, these loads shall be equalized. 
31  
167
C. It is the recommendation of both the Board and the Association that classroom assignments 
shall be based upon the following considerations: 
1. Physical size of the classroom 
2. Set maximums at this grade level 
3. Normal size of these grade level students  
32  
168
numbering
Elementary Maximum Students Note 
Preschool (See Note) According to State or Federal guidelines, 
whichever is lower. 
Kindergarten 26 (27*) Split classes prohibited; 
27=$80/marking period for each student in excess 
of 26 to TEA* *or .5 aide 
First, Second 28 (30*) 29, 30=$80/marking period for each student in 
excess of 28 to TEA or .5 aide 
Third, Fourth, Fifth 29 (30*) 30=$80/marking period for each student in excess 
of 29 to TEA or .5 aide 
Education, Media 
Split Grade Classrooms***  80% of max for lower grade level 
Ungraded Primary  80% of max for lower grade level 
*The District shall retain the flexibility to address an overcrowding situation by transferring some 
students within the building or to another building, or hire an additional teacher, using rooms available 
in existing facilities. 
**TEA (throughout article in same context) means TEA Scholarship FundTEA Education Fund  
Education Fund for graduating Troy School District high school students 
***A split grade classroom is two consecutive grades (i.e., first and second, fourth and fifth) in the 
same classroom  
33  
169
3.  
D. Class Size Maximums 
Art, Vocal Music, Physical 
30  
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Normal, Indent: Left:  1.11",  No bullets or
34  
 
170
13.2 Teaching Loads and Assignments, Secondary (6-12). 
A. Class Size Maximums 
Students 
Middle School 6-8 30  
Exceptions:   
Computer 28  
ESL 25  
World Language- full year 28  
World Language-exploratory 28 
Home Living 24 or number of lab stations, whichever less 
Industrial Education 24 or number of lab stations, whichever less 
English, Language Arts and Reading 30 all classes must average 26 
Music  100-199 students/day=1 sectional; 200+ 
students/day=2 sectionals 
Physical Education 33  
Science 28 or number of lab stations, whichever less 
Counselor Caseload 400 Contribution to TEA scholarship 
fundTEA Education Fund of 
$500 per semester if caseload goes over 
25 after count day. 
High School 9-12 30  
Exceptions:   
Advanced Placement 25 (30) 26-30=$80/marking period to TEA for each 
student in excess of 25 
Computer 26  
ESL 25  
Exceptions: 
World Language- 28  
Home Economics 24 or number of lab stations, whichever less 
Exceptions:   
Marriage & Family Life 30  
Child Growth & Development 30  
Housing and Home Furnishing 30  
Stitchery 30  
Singles Survival 30  
(additional exceptions need approval   
of secondary curriculum committee)   
Music  100-199 students/day=1 sectional; 200+ 
students/day=2 sectionals 
Physical Education 36  
Progressive Learning Support (PLS) 21 (23) (22-23) = $80/marking period to TEA for 
each student in excess of 21 
Science 24 or number of lab stations, whichever less 
Social Studies – basic 25 (30) 26-30=$80/marking period to TEA for each 
student in excess of 25 
Vocational Education 24 or number of lab stations, whichever less 
Counselor Caseload 400 Contribution to TEA scholarship 
fundTEA Education Fund of 
$500 per semester if caseload goes over 
25 after count day. 
35  
171
Level Maximum 
Note 
English, Reading, Language Arts 
Basic English –Level 1 
Basic English- Level 2 
TV Production 
30 all classes must average 26 
15  
21  
26  
B. English and Reading classes (6-12) 
1. Teachers shall be responsible for grading no more than one hundred thirty (130) 
students. For teachers who do not teach English classes full time, the daily student 
totals shall be as outlined below: 
1 English class 26 students 
2 English classes 52 students 
3 English classes 78 students 
4 English classes 104 students 
Example: 4 English + 1 Social Studies =134 students 
2. In grades 6, 7, and 8, when an English class is combined with any other 
departmental class for the purpose of team teaching, an aggregate maximum of no 
more than fifty-six (56) students shall be scheduled into the two (2) classes. 
C. All High school counselors shall evenly participate in a thirty minute (30) extended day 
coverage to support student needs. There shall be one (1) counselor scheduled each day  on 
Monday through Thursday to provide this coverage. The assigned counselor will stagger their 
report time by thirty minutes (30) on their extended day. The counseling department will 
propose a staggered day schedule to the building administration for the school year. 
D. Maximum Enrollments.  When any class in a school reaches the maximum number of 
students, the Administration with the Association will formulate plans for handling the first 
enrollee over the maximu m. The following shall be used as criteria in solving the 
overcrowding situation: 
1. Transfer student(s): 
a. within the school 
b. to another building 
2. In the event of an emergency (defined as a situation which cannot be resolved by 
the above procedures) the planned maximum may be exceeded by one (1) pupil. 
When this situation occurs, one-thousand dollars ($1,000.00_) will be paid into the 
TEA Scholarship FundTEA Education Fund per occurrence. 
3. Hire an additional teacher, using rooms available in some other community facilities 
if necessary. 
4. Either party to the master agreement may request a meeting to discuss alternative 
methods to numbers 1, 2 and 3 above. In this situation, the parties shall meet and 
discuss alternative methods such as, but not limited to, those listed below, 
recognizing that for teachers covered by the Tenure Act, since all listed alternatives 
involve teacher placement, the remedy is solely within the authority of the Board of 
Education: 
a. Voluntarily Increasing shared-timeshared time or part-time/part-time assignments. 
b. Recall a laid -off teacher, which may possibly necessitate the involuntary 
transfer of a teacher(s). 
36  
172
c. Voluntary Assignment of a sixth teaching period in the secondary buildings. 
(Pay shall be equal to one-fifth (1/5) of the teacher's pay rate.) 
d. The voluntary assigning of a sixth teaching period in the secondary may be 
accomplished after the following criteria have been considered: 
1) Availability and district-wide seniority within the department of the affected 
building. 
2) The number of sixth period class assignments the teacher has taught in past 
years. 
3) Teacher possesses the contractual requirements for teaching said course. 
course, the overage will be offered as a full year option to one (1) teacher before 
being offered to two (2) teachers as separate semester overage classes. 
The intent of Section 4 is to allow the parties th e opportunity to discuss and agree upon 
alternative methods of handling an overload of students at the secondary level, and to give 
teachers rated Effective or Highly Effective an equitable opportunity to teach a sixth period. 
E. It is the recommendation of both the Board and the Association that classroom assignments 
shall be based upon the following considerations: 
1. Physical size of the classroom 
2. Set maximums at this grade level 
3. Normal size of these grade level students 
F. Every effort shall be made to equalize class sizes of like sections in the same department. 
ARTICLE 14.   TEACHING CONDITIONS 
14.1 A high school teacher shall not be assigned more than five classes per day totaling two hundred 
ninety (290) minutes, and a middle school teacher shall not be assigned more than five classes per day 
totaling two hundred eighty-seven (287) minutes. Secondary teachers will have a preparation period of 
the same length as a one of his/her class periods each day. The class periods will range betw een fifty-
five (55) and sixty (60) minutes in duration. In the event the Board increases the passing time at 
secondary, the increased time shall be taken from the class period. 
shall have one non-student period. A maximum of ten (10) one-half days of guest teacher support, as 
determined by the teacher, will be provide to each middle school reading support teacher for student 
testing annually. 
Building Restructuring. A building principal may convene a building committee for the purpose  of 
restructuring. The building committee may submit recommendations for restructuring in the building 
to the Superintendent (or Superintendent’s designee) and the TEA Executive Committee for approval. 
The Administration and the TEA will appoint equal numbers of members to the building committee. 
If approved by the Superintendent (or Superintendent’s designee) and the TEA Executive Committee, 
the recommendation shall be submitted to a vote of the regular TEA members working in the building 
on at least a half -time basis. If at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the teachers who vote approve 
37  
173
4) Any other criteria upon which the parties  agreeIn the case of a full year 
Reading practitioners shall have two (2) non-student periods. Middle school reading support teachers 
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0", Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Space After:  12 pt
the restructuring recommendations, the recommendations shall be implemented at the beginning of the 
next school year, unless otherwise agreed by the Superintendent (or Superintendent’s designee) 
38  
174
 and the TEA to implement the restructuring at a different time. Unless otherwise agreed, these changes 
shall remain in effect for at least the duration of one school year. 
These changes shall remain in effect for subsequent school years, unless disapproved by the 
Superintendent (or Superintendent’s designee) or the TEA in writing by April 1st of the  preceding 
school year. At the request of either party made before February 1st, the restructuring changes may 
again be submitted to a vote of the regular TEA members working in the building on at least a half - 
time basis. Such vote shall be completed by M arch 15th. It is understood and agreed that any 
restructuring changes under this provision shall not address salaries, benefits or teacher performance. It 
is also understood that because the restructuring contemplated by this provision changes the contract , 
the vote shall be conducted by the TEA. 
14.2 No secondary teacher shall have more than three (3) preparations unless the teacher requests 
or accepts more. 
Any course offering or level of a course offering, whether it is at the same or a different level, in which 
students are evaluated for credit, shall be considered a preparation. The combining of two (2) or more 
course offerings in one (1) class period shall count as two (2) or more preparations. The following are 
excluded from being defined as a preparation: student assistants, independent study, study halls, in -
house suspensions and co-op coordinating hours. 
14.3 In schools where beverages are not otherwise or already available, vending machines shall be 
installed at the request of the TEA, the proceeds to be used at the discretion of the building faculty. 
14.4 Safety goggles and protective clothing will be provided to teachers of special areas, i.e., shop, 
science, art, and home economics. Laundry services will only be provided for auto mechanics, metal 
shop, machine shop, printing and welding teachers. 
14.5 Scheduling of Special Subjects. All scheduling of special subjects (art, music, physical 
education, media, Spanish, and ESL) will be done by the building principal after consultation with  
special subjects' teacher(s). Scheduling shall make due allowance for the best overall education 
benefits for all students. The scheduling shall include kindergarten (physical education only), and 
special education classes and provide travel time between buildings in addition to lunch time and 
planning time provided for elsewhere in this Agreement. 
14.6 Multi-building Assignments (Elementary). Elementary special subject teachers (music, art, 
physical education, Spanish, and ESL) will be provided twenty (20) minutes to travel between schools 
up to 4.9 miles apart; twenty-five (25) minutes to travel between schools 5-6.9 miles apart; and thirty 
(30) minutes to travel between schools more than seven (7) miles apart. Distances between schools 
will be as prescribed on the district mileage charts. Two (2) designated parking spaces shall be reserved 
near the main entrance of each elementary school for traveling teachers. These spaces shall be adjacent 
to one another and clearly marked with vertical, posted signage. 
building shall not be required to travel between buildings on their lunch hour. Secondary teachers 
traveling between schools on their preparation period will receive five hundred dollars ($500) per year. 
Appropriate proration of the five -hundred dollar ($500) amount will be paid to teachers traveling 
between schools for less than a full year. Teachers shall receive the lump -sum payment in the last 
regular paycheck issued in June of the teacher's school year. 
39  
175
14.7 Multi-building Assignments (Secondary). Secondary teachers assigned to more than one 
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0", Space After:  12 pt
40  
14.8 Early and Late Building Assignments. A teacher whose regular assignment to  
a combination of early and late start buildings results in him/her working beyond the 
contractual workday as defined in Article 12.1 will receive three hundred fifty dollars 
($350) per semester that 
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0.01", Right:  0.21",
Numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: a, b, c, … +
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.86" +
Indent at:  1.11", Widow/Orphan control
176
14.8  these circumstances exist. However, this payment shall not be made to such teacher unless 
he/she has brought these circumstances to the attention of his/her “home” building principal within 
thirty (30) calendar days of the start of the semester, and/or, if the “home” building principal otherwise 
resolves these circumstances within ten (10) calendar days of such notification. An elementary specials 
teacher who works additional time on scheduled half days of student instruction due to being assigned 
to a combination of early and late start buildings will receive one hundred fifty dollars ($150) per year. 
Any such payments made to teachers under this provision shall be made in a lump-sum payment in the 
last regular paycheck issued in June of the teacher’s school year. 
teaching duties. To the extent that the Board is ab le to provide, such duties shall be performed by 
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0.01"
principals, secretaries, clerks, aides, custodians and other employees. 
A. Secondary counselors may be required by the building administrator to interact with the 
students in the school cafeteria during lunchti me. Counselors will not be required to 
monitor or supervise lunch procedures during this time. The counselors may leave the 
school cafeteria to meet privately with a student when in the counselor's judgment the 
student's need will best be served by a private conference. 
B. Each secondary building shall have additional paid office help at semester ends to aid 
teachers. Individual buildings will arrange scheduling of this additional help as mutually 
agreed to by the principal, the staff of the building and the Employee Services Department. 
1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 
use. At least one room, appropriately furnished, shall be reserved as a staff lounge. 
B. Adequate rooms for use by special subjects' teachers, diagnosticians, psychologists, social 
workers, etc. Separate lockable storage cabinets of appropriate size shall be provided for 
the special subjects' teachers as needed. 
C. Telephone facilities shall be provided for teachers' use for school business and reasonable 
personal calls. The location is to be determined by the principal and staff as provided in 
letter of understanding. 
D. Paved parking facilities reserved for teachers' use during school hours. 
E. Two (2) classes will not be scheduled to meet in the same classroom at the same time except 
where rooms are physically designed for this purpose, the teachers arrange j oint sessions, 
or to accommodate emergency situations that do not extend beyond the close of the school 
day. 
14.11 Teaching Supplies. The Board shall provide equipment and supplies for every class so as  to 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.5", Hanging:  0.38", Right: 
maintain a high level of instruction for the children of Troy. 
0.22", Outline numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style:
A, B, C, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 
year shall be issued by the Board within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.5", Hanging:  0.38"
submission of a requisition to the principal, except for those items that are placed out for 
0.23", Outline numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style:
A, B, C, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 
B. Delays in shipping and the placing of an item for bid shall be reported to the teacher by the 
0.19" + Indent at:  0.69"
41  
177
14.9 Non-teaching Duties and Assignments. Teachers will be relieved of miscellaneous non - 
14.10 Teaching Conditions. The Board recognizes its duty to keep the schools properly equipped 
and maintained, including: 
A. Adequate lunchroom, restroom and lavatory facilities will be reserved exclusively for staff 
A. Purchase orders for supplies and equipment ordered by the teachers for the current school 
bid. 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", First line:  0", Right: 
0.21", Outline numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style:
0.11" + Indent at:  0.49"
0.19" + Indent at:  0.69", Widow/Orphan control
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.5", Hanging:  0.38", Right: 
building principal as soon as he/she becomes aware of delay. Supplies and  equipment 
ordered by a teacher for the ensuing school year shall be in the classroom September first,  
42  
178
B. unless a delay occurs and in that event, the teacher shall be so notified by the building 
principal on the teachers' first work day. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.5", Hanging:  0.38"
14.12 Library Use. Libraries and Media Centers shall be maintained as resource and learning centers, 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", First line:  0", Outline
not as classrooms, other than for classes involving the use of media center materials. Students shall not 
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Indent at:  0.49"
14.13 In-service Training. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", First line:  0", Outline
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
A. Five (5) half days per year may be allowed for in-service training, workshops, curriculum 
Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.11" +
B. The District shall make in-service training on special education issues available to teachers 
prior to the beginning of the school year. 
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
A. For all student reporting changes and revisions, a Student Reporting Committee comprised 
Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.11" +
The committee will be comprised of up to three (3) TEA representative as appointed by the 
Formatted: Font: Not Bold
TEA and at least one (1) elementary teacher from each affected building or, at least two (2) 
high school teachers and one (1) middle school teacher from each affected building.  In 
addition, teacher representatives from special education, ELD, elementary specials, and 
any other departments deemed necessary will be invited to participate on student reporting 
committees. 
B. The Student Reporting Committee will be a standing committee.  The Stude nt Reporting 
Committee will meet at least once a year to determine the validity of the reporting 
document, assess if the reporting document aligns with the Troy School District (TSD) 
provided curriculum, and address any student reporting issues. 
C. The Student Reporting Committee will work with a facilitator (i.e. Curric ulum Specialist) 
to determine the most effective method of communicating student progress to parents.  This 
committee will be charged with the duty of creating and/or revising any student repor ting 
instruments.  In addition, the Student Reporting Comm ittee will determine the most 
effective means to provide professional learning in relation to a change in student reporting, 
this includes any professional learning needs in technology that supports student reporting. 
D. The Student Reporting Committee will collaboratively design and approve all timelines for 
professional learning and the roll-out of any changes in reporting methods. 
E. In the event of a change in the student reporting instrument, the Dist rict will make every 
effort to provide all affected teachers with a cop y of the new student reporting instrument 
prior to the first student day. 
1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 
earlier than the end of the second work day following the last day of the marking period as 
shown on the calendar. It is recognized, however, that grades may be required for certain 
students earlier than the time lines above, and the teachers agree to cooperate and submit 
43  
179
be assigned to the library for disciplinary reasons. 
studies, etc., not including special days as listed in the calendar. 
14.14 Student Reporting Committee. 
of teachers from all affected grade levels, departments and/or groups will be established.  
14.1414.15 Report CardsStudent Reporting. Any new evaluation tool, such as report cards, shall 
be reviewed by a committee at that level. 
A. Report cards or final grades shall not be routinely required to be completed and handed in 
Indent at:  0.49"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", First line:  0", Outline
Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.11" +
Indent at:  0.49"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", First line:  0", Right: 
0.22", Outline numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style:
0.11" + Indent at:  0.49", Widow/Orphan control
grades earlier under these special circumstances (examples of special circumstances 
include student moving, scholarship and admission to college). 
B. Teachers shall have the authority to grade students and recommend whether a student shall 
be passed or retained. Any person or committee who has authority to change or reverse  a 
teacher's decision shall do so only after furnishing the teacher with written notification of 
their action. The notification shall include the name of the student and rationale for said 
change. 
C. Teachers with classes that regularly meet only every other school day will be required to 
grade students pass/fail for the first and third marking periods and with a regular letter 
grade at the end of the second and fourth marking periods. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.5", Hanging:  0.38"
14.1514.16 Elementary Report CardsStudent Reporting. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.06", First line:  0", Outline
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.11" +
will be aligned with the reading assessment windows. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.5", Hanging:  0.38", Space
Before:  12 pt, Outline numbered + Level: 3 +
Left + Aligned at:  0.19" + Indent at:  0.69"
C. The district will establish a committee of kindergarten teachers to work jointly with the 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.5", Hanging:  0.38"
Department of Teaching and Learning to deve lop a reporting instrument that meets the 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.5", Hanging:  0.38", Outline
needs of this grade level.Prior to the conclusion of the 2019-2020 school year, the District 
numbered + Level: 3 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
will create a subcommittee of the Student Repor ting Committee.  This subcommittee will 
Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.19" +
District will appoint a facilitator to lead this committee.  This committee will be charged 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.5", Hanging:  0.38"
with creating a recommendation of the most effective means to report elementary specia l 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.5", Hanging:  0.38", Right: 
student progress to parents.  The recommendation will include any changes to the student 
0.23", Space After:  12 pt, Outline numbered + Level: 3
reporting instrument, the number of reporting(s) per year, and the timeline for reporting(s).  
+ Numbering Style: A, B, C, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment:
must be granted approval by both the District and the Association. 
D. Specials teachers will conduct two (2) reportings per school year (first and third card 
marking). 
C.  
14.1614.17 Progress-Updates. If a student has been identified by the school psychologist, social 
worker, counselor or administrator as needing special attention, an arrangement can be made to provide 
more frequent progress-updates. 
44  
180
A. All elementary teachers (K-5) will conduct three (3) reportings per year. These reportings 
B. Comments will be required on all reportings. 
be comprised of at least one repre sentative from each elementary special domain.  The 
In order for the recommendation to be implemented, the subcommittee’s recommendation 
Indent at:  0.49"
Numbering Style: A, B, C, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment:
Indent at:  0.69"
Left + Aligned at:  0.19" + Indent at:  0.69"
45  
14.1714.18 The parties seek to educate young people in the democratic tradition; to foster their 
recognition of both indivi dual freedom and social responsibility; to inspire meaningful awareness of 
and respect for the Constitution and the Bill of Rights; and to instill appreciation of the values of 
individual personality. 
 
14.1814.19 Responsible teaching shall be encouraged for all teach ers who shall exercise such 
responsibility within the framework of the curriculum, school policies, good judgment and common 
standards of decency which shall prevail at all times. Within these guidelines, the teacher is encouraged 
to teach the student in the best manner of which he/she is capable. 
 
14.1914.20 Teachers have an obligation to present facts without bias, and to encourage students to 
think and to draw objective conclusions. 
 
14.2014.21 Teacher parking lots at the high schools shall be patrolled during the normal school hours. 
 
14.2114.22 All teachers and the TEA Office shall have electronic access to their building's 
handbook(s) and work rules. Also, the District Board Policy book will be available on the District’s  
website. 
 
14.2214.23 The Board agrees to provide necessary supp ort service for teachers who have students 
who do not speak English or for students who speak English as a second language. The support services 
may include in -service education, intermediate school district consultants (as available) and 
educational materials (as available). 
 
14.2314.24 Field Trips. The Board agrees to permit teachers to conduct approved educational field 
trips and, when necessary, to provide substitute teachers at Board expense. 
The Administration shall provide the bus driver with a map to the destination. At the time of approval, 
the Transportation Department shall furnish the requesting teacher with a statement of total costs, 
including complete mileage costs, bus driver's meal (if appropriate) and any other added costs. 
 
14.2414.25 Conferences. Teachers attending approved professional conferences shall be released 
from teaching duties without loss of leave days or compensation. The expenses for such conferences 
shall be assumed by the Board. Every effort shall be made to equitably distribute approved conferences 
according to the following levels: K-2, 3-5, 6-8, 9-12, and Special Education. 
 
The Board will reimburse a teacher for the appropriate expenses incurred while attending a Board 
approved conference upon submission of an itemized expense sheet. Trav el, meals, lodging, and 
registration fees shall be deemed appropriate expenses of the Board, as well as the cost of the substitute 
teacher needed to relieve the participant. A teacher attending such conferences and meetings shall be 
granted sufficient leav e time to attend without loss of compensation. Teachers  will submit, upon 
request, a written report regarding such conferences. 
 
14.2514.26 The principal, with the consent of the counselor, may request Central Office for approval 
that a counselor be allowed to work up to two (2) weeks during the summer break. If the counselor 
does work during the summer break, he/she shall be paid his/her daily rate of pay for each day worked. 
 
14.2614.27 When locker rooms cannot be supervised by teacher staf f, adult supervision will be 
provided by the Board. 
 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13", First line:  0", Outline
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.11" +
Indent at:  0.49"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13", First line:  0", Outline
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.11" +
Indent at:  0.49"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13", First line:  0", Right: 
0.22", Outline numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style:
1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 
0.11" + Indent at:  0.49", Widow/Orphan control
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13", First line:  0", Outline
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.11" +
Indent at:  0.49"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13", First line:  0", Outline
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.11" +
Indent at:  0.49"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13", First line:  0", Outline
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.11" +
Indent at:  0.49"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13", First line:  0", Outline
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.11" +
Indent at:  0.49"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13", First line:  0", Outline
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.11" +
Indent at:  0.49"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13", First line:  0", Outline
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.11" +
Indent at:  0.49"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13", First line:  0", Outline
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.11" +
Indent at:  0.49"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13"
181
Style: 1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left +
Aligned at:  0.11" + Indent at:  0.49"
46  
182
14.2714.28 Home economics teachers who are required to purchase groceries for their class shall be 
permitted to do so through the district food services whenever feasible. 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13", First line:  0", Space
After:  12 pt, Outline numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering
Start at: 10 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.11" +
television unless the TEA member signs the cable release form.  
47  
183
14.2814.29 Teachers will be provided reasonable access to duplicators and photocopiers for  
instructional purposes subject to machine capacity and other building requirements. 
14.30 Video taping Recording of sound and/or images  of TEA members performing regular daily 
duties during the seven- (7-) hour and ten- (10-) minute teacher workday will not be broadcast on cable 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13", First line:  0", Outline
numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
Indent at:  0.49"
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13"
Formatted: Normal, Indent: Left:  0.13",  No bullets or
ARTICLE 15. SPECIAL POPULATIONS 
numbering
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.13"
15.1 Inclusion/Special Education/504/ELD. 
A. The student age range in a classroom and/or caseload shall not exceed the state/federal 
regulations, rules or guidelines. Special education class size maximums shall be as provided 
in applicable federal and state statutes and the applicable administrative rules for special  
education. 
B. When practicable, rReasonable efforts shall be made to equalize or balance the numbers of 
Special Education, 504 and/or ELD students in like classes. 
administration agree, and there is no increase in building staff allocations. 
15.2 Inclusion professional development/communication. 
Teachers will be notified at least two (2) weeks prior to the start of the school year if they have students 
on their class roster that require and Individualized Positive Behavior Support Plan. 
The Board shall provide in-service training and orientation for general education and special education 
teachers regarding practices to be used with students who are included in general education classes. The 
in-service training and orientation will be provided prior to the firs t student day of the school year.  
The in-service training and orientation shall include, but not limited to, a clarification of  the teacher’s 
responsibilities as they relate to grading, instruction, and communication with parents and support  
personnel. 
A. Teachers shall be provided written guidelines as to the law, District policy and appropriate 
persons to contact regarding inclusion and special education. 
B. General education teachers will be informed regarding the nature of a special education 
student’s disability placed in their classrooms. 
C. No later than the second week of school year, general and special education teachers will 
be provided through the student information system: 
1. Names of students identified as special education, 504, ELD and the identity of the 
primary case manager. 
2. Required resources/materials as per the IEP of any student placed in the class of the 
general education teacher. 
3. IEP mandated training. 
4. Present level of academic achievement and functional performance (PLAAFP) as 
recorded in the IEP. 
48  
184
14.29  
C. Placement of special education students need not be equalized and class sizes may be 
adjusted as deemed appropriate, provided the impacted teacher(s) and building 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.38", Right: 
0.21", Widow/Orphan control
5. Supplementary aides and services (SAS) as recorded in the IEP. 
5.  Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.11",  No bullets or
numbering
49  
185
6. The behavior intervention plan (BIP) as necessary. 
7. The 504 Accommodation-At-Glance information.  
50  
186
Formatted: Normal, Indent: Left:  1.11",  No bullets or
D. Special education shall coordinate their leadership hours to attend changes of building level 
numbering
meetings (“move-up meetings”). When issues with logistics or teachers’ schedules occur, 
special education teachers shall meet with their building principal to ensure adequate 
substitute coverage to attend the building level meetings. 
E. General education teachers will: 
behavior support strategies. 
2. Collaborate with PCM/504 coordinator/ELD teacher concerns regarding special 
population student performance when concerns arise. 
3. Collaborate with PCM/504 coordinator /ELD teacher on strategies to improve 
student performance. 
4. Collaboratively plan with any special education teacher in a co -teaching 
environment. 
5. Regularly monitor and document progress of the special education students in their 
general education courses. 
6. Participate in IEPT/504 meetings when invited. 
7. Access and review student information outlined in 15.2.C. 
8. Implement SAS as required per the IEPs of students in their class. 
F. Special education teachers will: 
2. Communicate with general education teaching staff regarding  appropriate 
strategies, materials, accommodations, and supports for special education students. 
3. Work collaboratively with the general education teacher(s) to determine the 
essential course objectives for special education students who require a modified 
curriculum. 
4. Regularly monitor and document progress of th eir caseload students in  general 
education courses. 
5. Work collaboratively with general education teachers to implement SAS for student 
achievement, record IEP progress on quarterly reports and progress towards IEP 
goals and objectives in determining appropriate grading. 
6. Document SAS provided by the special education teacher, document progress 
toward IEP goals and objectives, and record IEP goal progress on quarterly reports. 
7. Ancillary staff must document SAS provided, document progress toward IEP goals 
and objectives, and record IEP goal progress on quarterly reports. 
8. Document contact time, services provided, record IEP progress on quarterly reports 
and progress towards IEP goals/objectives. 
9. Support their caseload with assistance on general education assignme nts, projects, 
and test preparation as needed to ensure that the IEP is implemented fully and that 
adequate progress is achieved on IEP goals. 
51  
187
7.  
1. Consult with PCM/504 coordinator/ELD regarding appropriate instructional  and 
1. Collaborate with general education teachers regarding content delivery. 
Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
and services and accommodations/modifications as appropriate. This assistance 
could include, but not be limited to: reading assignments/assessments; providing an 
alternate location for testing; extended time on assignments/assessments. 
with parents/families. 
environment, and/or special education categorical program classroom as  assigned 
by administration. 
a. Be responsible to monitor IEP implementation for all caseload students. 
b. Report concerns to administration. 
b.c. Notify general education teachers of changes to a student IEP and/or BIP within 
forty-eight (48) hours. 
15.3 Individual education plans (IEP) & 504 plans. 
A. Teachers shall be relieved of teaching duties during their involvement in  diagnostic 
interpretations meetings. Teachers required  to attend IEPC/504 meetings shall be 
relieved of teaching duties during their involvement in said meeting. 
B. Administration will advise building principals regarding replacement of  teacher 
participants at IEP meetings. 
C. If special education teachers cannot arrange meetings with ancillary staff, teachers are  to 
contact special education administration, who will arrange for ancillary staff participation. 
D. PCM shall make a reasonable effort to invite a general education teacher on the  student’s 
schedule to an IEP meeting where the general education teacher’s professional 
certifications align with the student’s area of disability. 
15.4 Health care needs of special education students. 
A. All needs of students who require specialized durable medical equipment will be provided 
appropriate equipment as mandated by the IEP. The equipment will be  ordered as soon as 
possible. Should a student move -in mid-year the appropriate specialized durable medical 
equipment shall be provided. 
B. Students required t o take prescribed medications during the school day should be given 
those medications by a trained staff member who has the knowledge and skills to 
administer or assist in the administration of medication to students which are necessary to 
maintain the stu dent in school and those needed in the event of an emergency. These 
guidelines do not prohibit any school employee from providing emergency assistance to a 
student. 
C. When a special education/medically fragile student requires special restraints, 
procedures or accommodations outside what is reasonably expected within the 
traditional classroom, general education and special education teachers who provide 
services to these students, shall be provided with appropriate and necessary training  in 
order to provide services in compliance with such students’ IEP.  
52  
188
10. Assist general education teachers in implementing IEP required supplementary aids 
11. Be primarily responsible in communicating their caseload students’ IEP  progress 
12. Be assigned to teach in a resource room classroom setting, co -teaching 
13. For primary case managers: 
Formatted: Right:  0.23", Space Before:  0 pt
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
Formatted: Right:  0.23", Line spacing:  single
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
C.  Formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Normal, Indent: Left:  0.49", Space After: 
12 pt,  No bullets or numbering
53  
189
15.5 Year-Round Early On Intervention Service Program and Assignments. 
A. Teacher(s)/ancillary staff teachers will work the contractual number of teacher days and/or 
hours based upon their FTE status, and fulfill all contractual obligations, such as 
attendance on and participation in professional development, record days and staff 
meetings. The teacher(s)/ancillary staff will be required to attend child team meetings and 
to be in attendance on evaluation days. 
B. Early-on intervention team(s) could be comprised of the following teachers based upon 
the needs of the particular student: an early intervention teacher, a speech and language 
therapist, a social worker and/or school psychologist. 
C. The required student days and/or student service hours for these teachers will be spread 
over the calendar year (July 1st- June 30th). There will be a maximum of ten (10 work days 
for these teachers in the summer.) All days worked in the summer, including meeting days 
and child service days will be made up/compensated in the upcoming school year in the 
form of “flex days.” The makeup/compensated days will not be taken on the day 
immediately before or the day immediately following the winter or spring break periods. 
D. If there is an unscheduled school or building closure (e.g. snow day, power outage, and/or 
any other reason) during one of the make -up/compensated days then the day will be 
rescheduled by the teacher. While the preference is for make-up compensated days to be 
taken as scheduled days off during the school year, if unforeseen circumstances do not 
permit for all of these days to be scheduled, then a teacher/non-certificated teacher will be 
compensated at his/her per diem rate for these days. 
E. A teacher/ancillary staff member may also elect to be compensated at his/her per diem 
rate for these days up to five (5) days and/or the they may opt to accumulate flex days for 
use during the next school year. 
15.6 Categorical classroom communication procedure. If the special education teacher in the 
specialized or categorical classroom has concerns about a student’s placement or performance in the 
classroom, the following lines of communication are available to allo w dialogue regarding the 
concern as follows: 
A. Discussion with other staff members of the IEP team 
B. Discussion with building principal 
C. Discussion with special education supervisor 
D. Discussion with special education director 
E. Meeting with appropriate grade level Deputy or Assistant Superintendent 
F. Meeting with Superintendent 
At each level, the parties shall attempt to resolve any issue regarding outstanding concerns. 
ARTICLE 16.  TRANSFERS 
16.1 All administrative vacancies will be publicized by being posted at e ach school, at the 
Administrative Center, and at the TEA Office. The posting shall include all pertinent information, 
including qualifications. All applicants who are employees of the District shall be given consideration 
and shall also receive written notification of the filling of the position. The Board supports a policy 
54  
190
of promotion from within the District, except when local candidates fall short of qualifying well for 
the position in the judgment of the Administration. 
16.2 Definitions. When used in this Article, the following terms shall mean: (1) A transfer is a 
change in building, grade level, department, course or subject matter; (2) a voluntary transfer is one 
requested by the teacher on his/her own or at the suggestion of the Administration; (3) an involuntary 
transfer is one not requested by the teacher. 
16.3 Teachers are subject to involuntary transfers from position to position and from building to 
building at the discretion of the Superintendent or his/her designee. 
16.4 A teacher who is transferred shall be certified and qualified to teach in the new assignment. 
16.5 If transfers are found to be necessary, the teacher will be notified. Upon request of the teacher, a 
meeting will be held bet ween the teacher, the TEA and the Assistant Superintendent, Employee 
Services, at which time the teacher will be notified of the reasons for such transfer. 
16.6 In the event a change in assignment occurs after June 1 and prior to the beginning of school in 
the fall, knowledge of this transfer will be sent to the teacher in writing. 
ARTICLE 17. SENIORITY 
17.1 Seniority is based on date of hire minus time spent on unpaid leave of absence, except for health 
and military leaves. Seniority is lost when employment as a te acher is terminated. Date of hire is 
defined as most recent first day of work or date of teacher signing first contract, whichever is first. In 
case of equal seniority, teacher seniority placement shall be determined by a one-time drawing among 
teachers tied with each other. The time and place of drawing shall be determined  by the Association 
and Board and announced to all teachers. The first name drawn shall rank ahead of the second, the 
second ahead of the third, etc. 
The drawings shall take place at the Administrative Center at the date and time announced five (5) 
days prior to the drawing. A teacher who does not participate in the drawing shall have his/her number 
drawn by the Association President. 
17.2 Unpaid leave of absence shall be deducted in monthl y multiples from the teacher's accrued 
seniority. 
17.3 To receive seniority credit for a month, a teacher must work until on or after the fifteenth (15th) 
of the month or return to work on or before the fifteenth (15th) of the month. 
17.4 Should the fifteenth (15th) of a month be a non-scheduled work day, the teacher must work the 
last scheduled work day prior to the fifteenth (15th) of the month or return the first scheduled work 
day after the fifteenth (15th) of the month. 
17.5 Seniority credit shall be earned at the  rate of ten (10) months per year. To earn credit for a 
month, the provisions of 17.3 and 17.4 shall apply. 
17.6 A teacher who becomes a member of the administration shall retain previous seniority but shall 
not accrue seniority while not in the teacher unit. 
17.7 An updated seniority list shall be provided by October 1 on a yearly basis. 
55  
191
for the position shall have a date of hire as the first day in the assignment. 
56  
192
17.8 A substitute who is hired to replace an absent teacher and is ultimately placed under contract 
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0", Space After:  12 pt
17.9 When a teacher's absence due to injury or illness exceeds forty (40) consecutive days  beyond 
the accumulated sick leave, the experience credit for these excess days shall be deducted on the basis 
of the closest tenth of a year. 
ARTICLE 18. LEAVE PAY 
18.1 Annual Leave. Fourteen (14) leave days per year shall be allowed, without loss of pay, for the 
following reasons: 
A. Personal illness 
B. Serious illness in the immediate family, which includes spouse, children and the members 
of the employee's household, parents and foster parents of employee or spouse and brothers 
and sisters of the employee. 
C. Death of a relative 
D. A teacher may use a maximum of twenty (20) days from his/her accumulated annual leave 
for the purposes of adoption. In instances involving international adoption where travel 
outside of the United States is required, a teacher may use a maximum of thirty (30) days 
from his/her accumulated annual leave for the purpose of adoption. 
E. Four (4) of the fourteen (14) annual leave days may be used for personal business, not 
including activities for pleasure. 
F. The teacher may borrow in advance from the following year's annual leave allowance by 
executing a promissory note through the TEA in favor of the School District, said note to 
be co-signed by the TEA. The teacher may borrow a maximum of five (5) days from the 
following year's annual leave allowance. 
18.2 Accumulated Leave Days. All the unused leave days shall be added at the end of each  fiscal 
year to the employee's unlimited accumulated leave day reserve. Said leave day reserve may be  used 
for reasons A, B, C and D above and/or as a basis for calculating severance pay. 
18.3 Absence from a Paid Workday. When an employee is absent on an in -service day or oth er 
paid workday, he/she shall not receive his/her salary and may be subject to penalties for such day 
unless his/her absence is covered under the preceding paragraphs of this Section or other sections of 
this Agreement. 
18.4 Absence before or after a Paid Holiday. Anyone wishing to take days off without pay before 
or after a paid holiday must make special arrangements with the Assistant Superintendent, Employee 
Services ahead of time, or risk loss of pay for the holiday. If more people request such time off tha n 
the Administration is able to provide substitutes for, the earlier requests will receive more  
consideration. 
18.5 Adjustment due to Unfinished Contract. Instructional personnel who leave the employment 
of the District before termination of the current year's  contract for reasons other than those beyond 
his/her control will forfeit one (1) leave day for each school month remaining at the date of termination 
of services, whether or not such leave days have already been used. Adjustment for such forfeiture 
shall be made on the employee's final paycheck. 
18.6 Absence due to court appearance or hearings before an administrative agency in a case 
connected with employment in the District or due to being subpoenaed on any proceeding  connected 
57  
193
with school duties will be paid for without being charged against sick leave or business leave days. 
58  
194
A. Absence in non -school-related court appearances may also be paid and charged against 
leave days with administrative approval. 
B. If a teacher must serve on jury duty, he/she will be paid the difference between his/her jury 
pay and his/her regular pay, without loss of leave days. 
18.7 Absence due to illness resulting from contact with children at school, if the contagious contact 
can be traced, will be paid for without deduct ion from sick leave days in the case of diseases such as 
mumps, measles, scarlet fever, whooping cough, chicken pox, scabies, pediculosis and conjunctivitis, 
but not for diseases such as influenza, flu or colds. 
When a student is found to have or have had a contagious disease, teachers in the building will be kept 
notified of the nature of the contagious disease. 
18.8 Absence due to religious observances may be deducted from current leave as personal business 
days up to a maximum of three (3) more days of leave than normally allowed for personal business. 
18.10 Should schools be closed due to conditions referenced in Artic le 9.1, any leave days usage 
assigned by a teacher for that day’s absence will be restored to the teacher’s leave bank.   Teachers on 
extended leaves, such as FMLA, that exceed three (3) days will not have the leave days restored. 
ARTICLE 19. MATERNITY, CHILD CARE, AND ADOPTION LEAVES 
19.1 The Board of Education shall grant a leave of absence for reasons of maternity, adoption or 
child care under the following conditions: 
A. For Maternity: 
1. A teacher may use sick days for the period of her disability to take a short -term 
leave to commence when the teacher and her physician determine that the teacher can 
no longer carry out her necessary teaching duties and to terminate when her physician 
determines she is able to return to work. Sick days may be used for up to six calendar 
weeks after the birth of the object child. In the event of a cesarean section, sick days 
may be used for up to eight calendar weeks. 
2. In the event of miscarria ge or death of the object child of the leave, the leave of 
absence will be terminated upon the request of the teacher. She shall be returned to a 
position for which she is certified. The granting of any such leaves, as described above, 
will in no way interrupt seniority and other rights attained thereto. 
B. For Child Care: 
1. A teacher may elect to remain home with the object child for the balance of the 
school year in which the child is born. If the teacher so indicated by written application 
two (2) months prior to anticipated birth, a childcare leave shall be granted. 
2. A request for an extension of the childcare leave shall be granted upon written 
request to the Board by March first of the school year preceding the extension. 
59  
195
18.9 Time off for selective service, physical or mental examinations, and hearings regarding 
reclassification will not be deducted from leave days. 
3. A combination of a maternity and a childcare leave shall not exceed four semesters 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", First line:  0", Right: 
0.22", Widow/Orphan control
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0", Space After:  12 pt
following the semester or summer in which the child was born. In any case, the return 
from leave shall coincide with the beginning of the school year, except the Board may 
grant a leave that provides for a teacher to return from the leave other than at the 
beginning of the school year. 
60  
196
4. A teacher who is utilizing FMLA for childcare purposes on the last day of the 
teachers’ school year shall not be considered to have used his/her first available year of 
childcare leave under the collective bargaining agreement. 
5. A teacher may use up to ten (10) consecutive leave days for the purpose of paternity 
leave. 
C. For Adoption: 
1. An adoption leave shall be granted by the Board for up to one (1) school year upon 
request of the teacher. Requests for adoption leaves should be made as soon as the 
adoption is known to be imminent. 
D. Any extension of any maternity, child care or adoption leave beyond the time provided in 
19.1 A, B or C may be granted by the Board. The denial of any extension beyond the time 
provided in 19.1 A, B or C is not subject to the grievance procedure. 
E. For return from maternity, childcare, or adoption leave, see 20.8. 
19.2 Any teacher may receive up to one (1) year leave without pay for purposes of family care. 
This is subject to renewal at the will of the Board. 
ARTICLE 20. LEAVES OF ABSENCE - GENERAL 
20.1 Military Leave. Any employee covered by the salary schedule who terminates employment in 
the School District to perform active service in the Armed Forces of the United States is entitled to 
reemployment in accordance with applicable State and/or Federal law. 
In the event of reemployment, the following provisions shall apply: 
A. Accrual of seniority shall be granted. 
B. Up to four (4) increments may be added as if the employee had been in the School District's 
employ during the time of such active service in the Armed Forces. 
20.2 Teaching-out-of-District Leave. Any teacher may receive up to one (1) year leave for the 
purpose of teaching outside the continental limits of the United States or in a recognized exchange 
teacher program or in an overseas or domestic Peace Corps assignment. Full credit shall be given for 
time spent in these programs. 
In the event the Board i s notified in advance that the teaching assignment is a two -year assignment, 
the Board shall, at the request of the teacher, extend the leave for one year; all other requests for 
extensions shall be granted at the discretion of the Board. 
20.3 TEA Business Leave. Up to two (2) officers of the TEA or members appointed by the TEA, 
upon written request, shall be given a leave of absence, without pay, for the purpose of performing 
duties for the TEA. Up to one (1) year's credit on the salary schedule may be given for the time spent 
in this program. A second year's credit may be given upon mutual agreement. 
20.4 Education Advancement Leave. Any teacher may receive up to one (1) year's leave without 
pay for purposes of continuing education. The teacher must submit an application, a program of study, 
approved acceptance documents from the university of the teacher's choice, and a written statement 
61  
197
from the teacher demonstrating the positive contributions that may be provided the school system upon 
completion of the leave. 
62  
198
In the event the Board is notified in advance that the program of study is a two-year program, the Board 
shall, at the request of the teacher, extend the leave for one year; all other requests for extensions shall 
be granted at the discretion of the Board. 
20.5 Health Leave. Upon the recommendation of the teacher's physician, a leave of absence shall 
be granted up to one school year, plus any unfinished school year. Two annual extensions of the health 
leave shall be granted upon written request of a teacher accompanied by a written statement by his/her 
physician. When the employee's health permits his/her return to duty, he/she shall notify the 
Superintendent in writing and submit a statement from his/her personal physician certifying fitness to 
return to duty. The Superintendent shall give the returning teacher a teaching assignment equivalent to 
the assignment for which he/she is certified and qualified. 
20.6 Elected Public Office Leaves. A member of the Association, who is a tenure teacher, elected 
to any local, state or federal office, may make application to the Board for a temporary leave of absence 
without pay, for a period of time not to exceed the term of office to which that member has been elected 
and upon receipt of such application, such leave shall be granted by the Board. 
20.7 Personal Leave. Any teacher may receive a one (1) school year leave without pay for 
exceptional reasons. The teacher shall submit a letter of application identifying the exceptional reasons 
for requesting said leave. The leave shall coincide with the school year. The teacher must give written 
notice by March 1 of intent to return the following fall. A teacher returning from personal leave will be 
assigned to a position for which he/she is certified and qualified. 
20.8 Reinstatement from Leave. Notice of intent to return at the beginning of the school year must 
be given by March 1. 
Teachers do not have a right to return from leave prior to its expiration date. There will be no loss of 
job security for refusing positions prior to the end of the leave. 
20.9 Full Salary Credit for Miscellaneous Leaves. Credit on the salary schedule for experience 
will be given for the time spent on the fol lowing leaves: military, sabbatical, Peace Corps service, 
overseas teaching and exchange teaching. 
ARTICLE 21. SABBATICAL LEAVE 
21.1 Sabbatical Leave. The Board recognizes the benefits to the teachers and the School District of 
a systematic plan for sabbatical leave to qualified teaching personnel and therefore agrees to the 
establishment of the following at one-half (1/2) pay and full insurance benefits. 
and the TEA. 
1. The deadlines for making application for sabbatical leave shall be April first and 
December first, for the first and second semesters respectively. 
consecutive years in the Troy School District, and possess a permanent teaching 
certificate. Approved leaves of absence will not count toward the seven (7) year 
requirement, but will not interrupt the consecutive years of service. 
63  
199
A. Up to two (2) members of the staff may be granted sabbatical leave each calendar year. 
Candidates for sabbatical leave shall be reviewed jointly by the Board and its representative 
2. To be elig ible, the applicant must have been employed a minimum of seven (7) 
Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging: 
0.38", Right:  0.22", Widow/Orphan control
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0", Space After:  12 pt
one (1) school year. In the event the Board is notified in advance that the program is a 
two (2) year program, a one - (1-) year educational advancement leave (Article 20, 
Section 20.4) will be granted for the second year. In the case of a two- (2-) year program, 
one year's full salary shall be prorated over the course of the two years. 
4. The applicant must furnish upon request one (1) written report per semester to the 
Board. This report shall concern itself with his/her progress while on sabbatical leave. 
5. A screening committee will be appointed by the Superintendent. The teacher 
members of this committee shall be selected from a list submitted by the TEA. The 
Superintendent may request additional names be added to the list in the event he/she 
feels he/she is unable to make a selection from the list submitted. This committee will 
consist of one administrator, one senior high school teacher, one middle school teacher, 
two elementary school teachers, and one person from "special services." This committee 
will make a recommendation to the Superintendent. The committee will give 
consideration to the following when evaluating candidates: 
a. Overall benefit to the school system 
b. Type of work to be pursued 
c. Length of service in Troy 
d. Proportional grade level distribution 
6. The screening committee will make its recommendations within thirty (30) days of 
the application deadline. 
7. All applicants will be notified in writing of the Board's decision by the 
Superintendent or his/her representative. 
8. Before beginning the sabbatical leave, the teacher shall enter into a contract, to 
return to active service in the Troy School District for a period of at least two (2) years 
after the expiration of such leave. A teacher who does not fulfill this agreement shall 
repay to the Board, or shall have furnished a cash bond in the necessary amount received 
by the teacher during the sabbatical leave. This rule shall not apply in cases where the 
person becomes incapacitated or in cases where the rule is waived by the Board. 
B. A teacher, upon return from a sabbatical leave, shall be restored to his/her former position 
or to a position of like nature, seniority and status. Any period spent on sabbatical leave 
shall be treated as teaching service for purposes of applying the salary schedule set forth in 
Schedule A of this Agreement and seniority credit. 
21.2 Retirement credit and responsibility for retirement payments shall be as set forth i n the 
applicable law, rules and regulations of the Michigan Public School Employees' Retirement System 
(MPSERS). 
64  
200
3. Sabbatical leave will be granted for at least one (1) school system semester or for 
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0", Space Before:  0 pt
ARTICLE 22. LINES OF COMMUNICATION 
22.1 Any communication prior to the filing of a grievance between the interested parties shall follow 
the hereinafter prescribed order and shall be completed by the end of the second school day: 
A. Teacher to department head or immediate supervisor where applicable 
B. Teacher and department head, where concerned, to building principal 
C. Teacher, department  head (if desired) and principal to the Assistant Superintendent, 
Employee Services or other Central Office administrators 
If mutual understanding of the situation or problem under discussion has not been reached, the teacher 
may elect to use the Grievance Procedure provided elsewhere in this Agreement. A teacher may have a 
TEA representative present. 
ARTICLE 23. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 
23.1 Purpose. The purpose of this procedure is to secure, at the most appropriate administrative 
level, equitable solution to the problems which may from time to time arise affecting the welfare or 
working conditions of teachers as provided for in this Agreement. Both parties agree that these 
proceedings shall be informal and confidential. 
23.2 Definition. A grievance shall mean a claimed violation of this Master Agreement or a 
complaint involving its interpretation or application. The grievance procedure shall not apply to  any 
matter which is prescribed by law, or state regulations, or over whic h the Board is without power to 
act. However, the right to grieve shall not be denied in case of an alleged misinterpretation of 
established law or state regulation. A grievance may be filed by an aggrieved teacher or by the TEA. 
23.3 Procedure. Since it is important that grievances be processed as rapidly as possible, the number 
of days indicated at each step should be considered as maximum and every effort will be made to 
expedite the process. The time limits specified may, however, be extended by mutual agreement. 
In the event the last day for action falls on a Saturday, a Sunday, or holiday, the action date shall be 
extended until the next school day. The counting of days in Steps 1, 2, or 3 begins the day after either 
of the parties has received a reply. 
At the time of filing, it shall be the responsibility of the grievant and administrator with whom the 
grievance is initially filed to prepare copies. The administrator may prepare copies for the Board or its 
agent, and the teacher may prepare copies for the TEA or its agent. 
Copies of replies at each step shall be sent to the administration, teacher and TEA. 
In the event a grievance is filed on or after the first of June, it shall be resolved prior to the beginning 
of the next school year, unless the grievance requires more rapid processing, in which case normal 
time limits shall apply. 
Step One.  A teacher with a grievance shall first discuss it with his/her principal or supervisor.  Such  
grievance shall be reduced to written form and discussed within ten (10) working days from the time of 
the incident or completion of the "lines of communication" over which the teacher is aggrieved or 
following his/her reasonable ability to have knowledge of the incident. At his/her option the teacher 
may invite a TEA representative to be present while the grievance is discussed. Every effort shall be 
65  
201
made to resolve the grievance informall y; however, the teacher will assure the principal (supervisor) 
that the topic under discussion is in fact a grievance. 
66  
202
Step Two. If the grievance is not resolved at Step One, or in the event that no decision has been 
rendered within five (5) days, he/she or the TEA may refer such grievance in writing to the Assistant 
Superintendent, Employee Services within five (5) days. Within the five (5) days after the Assistant 
Superintendent, Employee Services receives the grievance, the responsible C entral Office 
Administrator(s) shall meet with the aggrieved teacher and/or the TEA and the principal and/or 
supervisor in an effort to resolve the grievance. The teacher may invite the TEA representative(s) (not 
more than three) to be present at this meeting, at which time the TEA will be given an opportunity to 
present its view of the individual teacher's grievance. The decision on the grievance shall be rendered 
in writing in five (5) days. 
Step Three. If the grievance is not resolved at Step Two, or if a notice that no hearing will be granted 
is received, the TEA may request, within fifteen (15) days that the matter be submitted to impartial 
arbitration. It is understood that only the TEA may pursue a grievance to Step Three. If the grievance  
is to be submitted to impartial arbitration, a request shall be sent to the American Arbitration Association 
requesting their services. The selection of an arbitrator and the conducting of the hearing will be in 
accordance with their procedures and rules. The parties may agree that the arbitration procedure on an 
individual case basis shall be expedited. The decision of the impartial arbitrator shall be final and 
binding on all parties. The impartial arbitrator shall have no power to add to, subtract from, disregard, 
alter, change or modify any of the terms of this Agreement. The expenses and fee, if any, of the 
impartial arbitrator shall be shared equally by both parties. 
23.4 Miscellaneous. 
A. Grievances filed at Step One shall be passed on to the proper step immediately when it has 
been determined that the administrators at the above -stated step do not have the authority 
to act on the grievance. 
B. It is assumed that grievance problems will be handled at times other than when the teacher 
is at work and the members of the TEA and administration will be present to process 
grievances promptly. Release time for the purpose of processing grievances at Steps One 
and Two, inclusive, will be provided for the grievant, witnesses and the TEA representative 
by mutual agreement between the TEA and the appropriate administrative level personnel. 
Release time shall be provided for witnesses, the grievant, and the TEA representatives for 
the purpose of participating in arbitration hearings as provided for in Step Three. All release 
time shall not cause the released parties to suffer loss of salary or any leave days. The TEA 
will make every effort to notify the Employee Services Department at least forty-eight (48) 
hours in advance. 
C. If the teacher pursued the grievance without TEA support as prescribed in Step Two, the 
right of the TEA to be present and to present a view at hearings in Step Two is preserved, 
and the TEA is to receive copies of written decisions at all steps. 
D. If more than one teacher has a similar complaint, the TEA may file a grievance to be 
commenced at Step Two, in lieu of multiple individual grievances. 
specified time limit is  cause for relief sought to be granted, provided the TEA notifies  the 
appropriate administrative agent that they have failed to answer a grievance in a timely 
fashion and such failure to answer continues for five (5) days from receipt of notice that 
such response has not been made. 
67  
203
E. Failure at any step of this procedure to communicate the decision on a grievance within a 
F. Failure to file the grievance in writing as specified in Steps One and Two shall mean the 
Formatted: Space After:  12 pt
Formatted: Right:  0.23"
grievance is waived. Failure to forward the grievance to Steps Two through Three shall 
mean that the grievance is waived, providing the administrator at the previous step notifies  
68  
204
F. the TEA that such forwarding of the grievance has not taken place in a timely manner and that the 
TEA continues its failure to forward the grievance for five (5) days after receipt of notification of 
failure to proceed. 
G. If the employee elects to be represented, he/she may be present at any step of the grievance 
procedure where the grievance is to be discussed except that he/she need not be present 
where it is mutually agreed that no facts are in dispute and that the sole question is the 
interpretation of this Agreement. 
H. The filing of a grievance shall in no way interfere with the rights of the Board to proceed 
in carrying out its management responsibilities, subject to the final decision on the 
grievance. 
I. The TEA may process a grievance on behalf of an employee or group of employees. 
Grievances processed by the TEA on behalf of an individual must be signed at Step One 
and Two, whichever is appropriate, or the individual employee m ust sign a letter 
authorizing the TEA to process a grievance on his/her behalf. A grievance processed by the 
TEA on behalf of a group of employees must be signed by at least one (1) member of that 
group at Step One or Two, whichever is appropriate, or a letter signed by at least one 
(1) member of that group authorizing the TEA to process said grievance. 
J. During the pendency of any proceedings and until a final determination has been reached, 
all proceedings shall be private, and any preliminary disposition will  not be made public 
without the agreement of all parties, except as otherwise may be required by law. 
K. There shall be no reprisals of any kind by any administrative personnel taken against any 
party-in-interest or his/her TEA representative, or any other participant in the procedure set 
forth therein by reason of such participation. 
L. All documents, communications, and records dealing with the processing of a grievance 
shall be filed separately from the personnel files of the participants. 
M. Forms for filing grievances (Appendix 1), service notices, taking appeals, making  reports 
and recommendations, and other necessary documents shall be given appropriate 
distribution by the Superintendent so as to facilitate operation of procedures set forth herein. 
N. Grievances which have not been resolved prior to the expiration of this Agreement shall 
continue to be processed according to the terms of the Agreement until resolved. 
O. Grievances challenging alleged violations of contract occurring during the last two (2)  
weeks of school (other than continuing violations) shall be filed in compliance with the 
time limits specified in Step One or Step Two, whichever is applicable; however, 
processing of all grievances shall be suspended for forty-five (45) calendar days during the 
summer recess. The forty-five- (45-) day period shall be determined by the TEA which shall 
notify the Board, in writing, in advance of the dates of the suspension period. 
ARTICLE 24. NEGOTIATION PROCEDURES 
but of common concern to the TEA, teachers and administrators in the school system may be discussed 
from time to time. The practice of free and open discussion between the TEA, teachers and 
administrators at all levels is to be preserved and the formulation of an agreement is not intended to 
limit the areas of discussion or concern. 
69  
205
24.1 Discussion of Non -Agreement Items. It is agreed that items not covered by this  Agreement 
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0", Space After:  12 pt
24.2 Negotiating Teams. In any negotiations herein described, neither party shall have any control 
over the selection of the negotiating or bargaining representatives of the other party and each party may 
select its representatives within or outside the school district. It is recognized that no final agreement 
between the parties may be executed without ratification by a majority of the Board and by a majority 
of the membership of the TEA, but the parties mutually pledge that representatives selected by each 
shall be clothed with all necessary power and authority to make proposals,  consider proposals and 
make concessions in the course of negotiations or bargaining, subject only to such ultimate ratification. 
24.3 Negotiation Time. Negotiations shall be carried on at times mutually agreed upon and 
essentially outside of the teacher's regular working period. 
24.4 Annually, individual teacher contracts for the following school year for non-tenure personnel, 
including those recommended for tenure, will be issued on or before June 1 of the current school year. 
The individual contracts issued to non -tenure teachers and those receiving their first tenure contract 
shall be returned to the Employee Services Department on or before the tenth work day after issuance. 
The contract will contain the current year's teacher salary figure until a new Agreement has been 
achieved. Once a teacher receives a tenure teacher contract, such contract will be considered to be 
continuing until such time that the teacher is n otified to the contrary. Tenure teachers will receive an 
annual salary notification. All contracts issued by the District will be subject to the Master Agreement 
entered into between the Board and the TEA. 
ARTICLE 25. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
25.1 The Board may use any legal and reasonable procedure to establish facts in any  investigation 
instituted within its jurisdiction involving employees, students and/or school property. 
25.2 At each regular and special Board meeting, the TEA will be provided with copies of m inutes 
of previous meetings, the Superintendent's recommendations, monthly financial reports, the agenda, 
and other public materials. Copies of the agenda and administrative recommendations will be sent via 
intra-district mail to the Assistant Superintendent, Employee Services and the officers of the TEA and 
the building representatives, with two (2) copies being sent to the President. The list of persons to 
receive these materials shall be furnished to the Central Office and kept current by the TEA. 
The TEA shall be duly advised by the Board of fiscal, tax and major budgetary programs affecting the 
District. 
25.3 This Agreement shall supersede any rules, regulations or practices of the Board which shall be 
contrary to or inconsistent with its terms or any terms contained in any individual teacher contracts 
heretofore in effect. All future individual teacher contracts shall be made expressly subject to the terms 
of this Agreement. The provisions of this Agreement shall be incorporated into and be considered part 
of the established policies of the Board by reference. 
District’s Intranet site, may print a copy of the agreement on a district printer. 
group of employees should be found to be contrary to law, then such provision or application shall not 
be deemed valid except to the extent permitted by law, but all other provisions or applications shall 
continue in full force and effect. The parties shall meet and renegotiate any provision or application of 
70  
206
25.4 Fifty (50) printed copies of this Agreement shall be prepared at the expense of the Board for 
the TEA. Each member shall have access to a copy of the collective bargaining agreement on the 
25.5 If any provisions of this Agreement or any application of the Agreement to any employee or 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.11", First line:  0", Right: 
0.21", Widow/Orphan control
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0", Space After:  12 pt
the Agreement found contrary to law. 
71  
207
25.6 Professional Relations Committee. The Board and the TEA will establish a committee of not 
to exceed six members, three from each party, which will meet on a regular basis during the school year 
to discuss and study matters of mutual interest concerning the Troy School District which fall within 
the provisions of this contract and/or other matters of mutual concern. The purpose of these meetings 
shall be to provide a means whereby: 
A. The items of concern to the TEA may be brought to the attention of the Board 
representatives for consideration. 
B. The items of concern to the Board may be brought to the attention of the TEA 
representatives for consideration. 
C. A high level of mutual understanding may be maintained. 
D. To clarify and/or assist in interpreting the language of the contract. 
E. To identify any committees that exist in the District and discuss their goals and progress. 
The operating procedures and meeting times for discussions of the committee shall be determined by 
the committee. However, the committee shall not meet while negotiations for a successor collective 
bargaining agreement are in progress except to complete a project. 
25.7 If an economic portion of this Agreement that is not enforced because of questioned l egality 
later becomes legal, or would have been legal had payment been made, the Board will pay all affected 
teachers retroactive monetary benefits as soon as feasible after the legality has been determined. 
25.8 Automobile Insurance. A teacher using his/her automobile while performing or acting on 
authorized school business shall have automobile insurance or be responsible equal to the state 
minimum insurance requirements. 
25.9 Professional Development and Educational Improvement. The Board agrees to pay the cost 
of tuition and texts for in-service courses initiated by the Board and will recognize and accept whatever 
credit accrues from their satisfactory completion. 
25.10 Outdoor Education Program. No teacher shall be required to participate in the outdoor 
education program. Participation in this program shall, to the extent possible, be limited to fifth grade 
teachers and students. 
25.11 Teachers have the option not to report to their building on teacher work days at the end of the 
first, second and third quarter. Teachers may leave on the last day of school once their work is complete 
and they have checked out with the building principal 
25.12 In an effort to  limit the solicitation of teachers by agents for 403(b) and 457(b) products, the 
parties agree to cap the number of agents as of June 30, 2004. The parties may agree to add an agent 
(who meets the district’s standards) upon mutual agreement if the parties determine a waiver is in their 
best interests. It is understood that MEA Financial Services will remain a vendor for as long as it 
complies with the District’s requirements. 
Agreement shall acquire tenure in any capacity other than as a classroom teacher. Any such tenure 
previously acquired by any teacher employed under this Agreement is waived. 
72  
208
25.13 Tenure in a Capacity Other than as a Classroom Teacher. No employee under this 
Formatted: Indent: First line:  0", Space After:  12 pt
25.14 Summer School. The Board agrees to pay bargaining unit teachers for such summer school 
work a rate of pay not less than that paid during the summer of 1992. 
25.15 Mentors. 
A. The District retains the discretion to assign mentors which assignments are subject to 
acceptance on a voluntary basis. Each mentor shall be paid Five Hundred Dollars ($500) 
per mentee as designated within Schedule C. 
B. Each mentor shall be assigned one (1) mentee. All applications for exception are to be 
forwarded to the Assistant Superintendent for Employee Services. If mentors are approved 
to work with more than one (1) teacher, meetings may not be concurrent, and mentors shall 
not be assigned more than two (2) mentees. The mentor receives the contractual stipend for 
each mentee. 
C. The mentor assignment is typically for one (1) year. 
D. Mentors and mentees shall keep a log of their activities per District protocol. 
(See Appendix 2.) 
1. Mentors must provide mentees with at least fifteen (15) hours of mentor time. 
2. The only time mentors can count towards the minimum fifteen (15) hours is time 
outside of the mentor’s regularly scheduled work time. (E.g. Mentoring may occur on 
their duty-free lunch.) 
E. The log should be completed on or before June 1 st and forwarded to the Assistant 
Superintendent, Secondary Instruction or Assistant Superintendent, Elementary Instruction 
at Central Office. The log will be used to validate mentor session time. 
F. Mentors and mentees will be surveyed at the end of the year based on mentoring duties 
defined below in Section G. 
G. Mentors will work with mentees in a variety of ways on a variety of issues. The goal is to 
help the mentee improve his or her craft and attain/maintain effective performance. Issues 
that mentors and mentees might address include any of the following: 
1. Daily routines in school; 
2. Preparing lessons using District approved curriculum; 
3. Meeting standards; 
4. Interpreting MEAP/MME or other student growth or proficiency data; 
5. Classroom assignment; 
6. Preparing substitute teacher folders; 
7. Procedures for field trips; 
8. Building protocols and procedures; 
9. Where to access technology help; 
10. How to access e-mail and voice mail messages; 
11. Parent meetings; 
12. Classroom management; 
13. Student records; 
73  
209
14. Where to find recourses for the classroom; 
15. IEP issues; 
74  
210
17. How to get involved in extra-curricular events. 
H. Mentors and mentees should find ways of touching base on regular occasions. Mentors 
should be able to serve as a guide to help the mentee manage curriculum,  classroom 
management, and building/student/parent issues. 
I. Mentor Expectations. 
Availability The mentor is always available to the mentee. The mentor frequently initiates contact with the mentee. 
Regular mentor sessions are planned. 
Problem Solving The mentor frequently leads the mentee into discovering possible solutions to problems on his or her own 
through asking questions and making suggestions. Occasionally, the mentor includes reference to how he or 
she would handle the situation. 
Reflective Questions The mentor frequently takes the opportunity to ask reflective questions of the mentee. The mentor utilizes 
reflective questioning skills to invite the mentee to look at his or her teaching practices with an eye for 
improvement. The mentor models *The Learning Cycle. 
Confidentiality The mentor is sensitive to and closely adheres to the “Firewall” between mentoring and evaluation. Topics 
and discussion from mentoring sessions are not shared with other staff or administration. Classroom 
observation notes made by the mentor become the sole property of the mentee following reflective 
conferences. 
Feedback The mentor engages in observing the mentee’s classroom on several occasions. The mentor provides positive 
peer coaching feedback that is specific and evidence based in a timely manner. The feedback is designed to 
increase the mentee’s teaching skills by reinforcing “Best Practices” that are observed. Feedback also 
includes reflective questions centered on areas for improvement. 
Encouragement The mentor encourages the mentee to try new things, expand his or her teaching skills and become actively 
involved with students, parents and staff. The mentor models a positive attitude toward the school, the 
District and the community at large. The encouragement to succeed is genuine. 
students. 
Technology The mentor frequently utilizes information-age learning and technology to enhance the mentoring 
experience. 
J. Mentoring Sessions. 
1. Mentoring will occur in a variety of formal and informal settings. 
2. Mentors and the mentees will create a schedule of formal mentoring sessions. At a 
minimum, monthly individual mentoring sessions should be scheduled. Time 
should be set aside for these more formal sessions. Formal mentoring time can be 
scheduled before or after school . Mentors and mentees can also decide to meet  on 
the weekend or in the evening. 
often take place in the hall, at the copy machine, during lunch, etc. 
4. Upon request, mentors shall be provided with release time to conduct two (2) 
classroom observations of his/her mentee. This time shall be mutually scheduled by 
the mentor, mentee and building principal b ased upon the availability of guest 
teacher coverage or other suitable coverage for the mentor’s classroom/assignment. 
Any additional release time for the mentor and/or release time for the mentee is 
subject to approval by the building principal. 
5. Mentors and mentees can earn up to fifteen (15) hours of professional development 
for the mentoring activity. 
75  
211
16. School committees; and/or 
Knowledge of 
Content 
The mentor demonstrates an in depth understanding of content pedagogy and student standards. The mentor 
actively interprets how the content can be put into practice in the classroom using effective pedagogy for all 
Managing Student 
Learning 
The mentor can effectively manage and monitor student learning for ALL students, can systematically 
organize lessons and frequently offers assistance. 
3. Mentors can and should meet with the mentee on an informal basis to review 
lessons, talk about problems that have just arisen, etc. These conversations will 
Formatted: Space Before:  0 pt
Formatted: Indent: Left:  1.11", Right:  0.21",
Widow/Orphan control
6. Generic mentoring sessions shall be created for 1st and 2nd semester on the District’s 
professional development tracking system. These sessions shall appear on the 
professional development calendar on January 15 and May 15 of the given school 
year. Each of these generic mentoring sessions is for seven and one-half (7 
½) hours of professional development credit. Mentors and mentees shall register 
for these generic sessions instead of submitting special requests. 
K. Mentor payment will be validated based on the mentoring log that is submitted by the 
mentor on or before June 1st. 
L. The provisions within this Article may be altered upon mutual agreement by both parties. 
ARTICLE 26. INSURANCE 
26.1 
A. The District shall maintain compliance with the Publicly Funded Health Insurance 
Contribution Act (PA 152 of 2011) and employee payroll deductions are authorized as 
necessary for this purpose. During the term of this agreement, the District shall pay the 
annual maximum amount allowable by PA 152 toward the total cost of the medical and 
prescription premiums for the plans offered (or the maximum contribution allowed by any 
contractual restrictions outlined in this agreement). The Board and the Association agree 
to convene annually to review plan coverage offerings and employee premium 
contribution amounts consistent with PA 152. 
Teachers are responsible for paying the difference, which shall be deducted evenly through 
pre-tax payroll deductions. Deductions shall be made over 21 pays, beginning with the first 
pay of the school year. 
MESSA PAK A is a benefit program which combines medical, dental, vision, life and long-
term disability insu rances listed in Article 26.1 into two plans, with MESSA as the 
administrator/carrier. It is understood that if a husband and wife are both employed as 
teachers by the District, they and their dependents shall only be covered by one District - 
paid MESSA PA K A insurance plan (i.e., the district shall only pay the annual amount 
indicated above for the appropriate level of coverage – single, two person or family one 
time.) 
At any point, the Association may elect to move to a different level of MESSA deductible, 
co-pay, and/or prescription drug card. If a change to the plan is to be made, the Association 
shall notify the District in writing, and the change shall take effect on the first of the month, 
plus 30 days following the request. EXAMPLE: On May 14th, the Association notifies the 
District in writing that a plan change is desired. The new plan would take effect on July 1st. 
District’s current IRS Section 125 cafeteria plan in accordance with applicable law, where 
possible. Furthermore, the Plan B and/or Cafeteria Plan cash payment shall only be 
available to that spouse who is currently receiving the cash stipend as of December 12, 
2008 (i.e. such teachers are grandfathered). 
76  
212
Teachers shall be allowed to increase their flexible spending plan amounts under the 
Formatted: Space After:  12 pt
Plan A 
Medical: The mutually agreed upon MESSA health insurance plans found on the Employee 
Services Intranet and District Transparency Report. This medical insurance 
shall be provided for the employee, spouse, and/or eligible dependents. 
Life: Two times the teacher's salary with double indemnity in the event of accidental death 
(except due to drugs, alcohol, suicide and warfare as covered in most policies) 
and dismemberment schedule. Teachers hired on or after June 4, 1991 shall only 
be eligible for life insurance in the amount of $50,000 AD/D (except  due to 
drugs, alcohol, suicide and warfare as covered in most policies). Teachers 
leaving will be notified of conversion policies. 
Dental: Delta Dental Insurance: The full family plan shall be a true group with internal and 
external coordination of benefits. For teachers who are not covered by another  
dental insurance equal to or greater than Delta Dental Plan C-01, those persons 
shall be enrolled in Delta Dental A uto Plus 008. Those persons covered by 
another dental plan equal to or greater than Delta C-01 shall be enrolled in Delta 
C-03. 
Vision: VSP III: Full Family; true group with internal and external coordination of benefits. 
Long-Term Disability: 
Long term disability income insurance to cover all regular contracted full-time 
and half-time employees under the age of seventy (70) after the first sixty (60) 
calendar days of any illness or disability. Such insurance shall pay up to two - 
thirds (2/3) of his/her regular salary and reduced by any amounts paid or payable 
under Worker's Compensation, Social Security, or any school sponsored 
pension plan. The remuneration under this article is as established under the 
company's policy and is paid at the daily rate of seven (7) days per week, fifty-
two (52) weeks per year of one/three hundred sixty -fifth (1/365)of the annual 
salary of the employee. This remuneration is paid for up to age seventy (70) for 
both accident and illness. Currently, MESSA waives insuran ce premiums for 
the first twenty -four (24) months a teacher is drawing long -term disability 
insurance benefits. The parties agree that if MESSA changes their current 
practice to adversely affect a teacher who is drawing long -term disability 
insurance, the Board shall provide for all insurances without cost to the teacher 
who is on long-term disability through August 31 of the school year the teacher 
goes on disability. 
OR 
teachers hired and married to another district employee prior to December 31, 2008). This 
provision shall not restrict any teacher from receiving District-provided Plan B insurance 
coverage currently provided by MESSA PAK B at the benefit levels indicated in this 
provision. 
Life: Same as Plan A (teacher only). Dental: 
Same as Plan A (full family). Vision: Same 
as Plan A (full family). 
Long Term Disability: Same as Plan A (teacher only). 
Cash Payment:  Teachers shall receive a cash payment of $1,000 annually.   If  forty-five 
77  
213
Plan B (for employees who do not choose Plan A, do not receive Plan A benefits or other 
Board-provided medical insurance coverage through his/her spouse (except for those 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.86", Right:  0.22",
Widow/Orphan control
(45) or more teachers elect not to receive district provided medical insurance coverage, 
78  
214
then the rate of payment shall be $2,250 $2,500 annually. This amount shall be paid in two 
equal payments, the first in the second payroll in January and the second payment in the 
second payroll in June. 
OR 
B. This Section 26.1 is subject to the following: MESSA PAK insurance is available only for 
the term of the Agreement and is an open issue for collective bargaining on the expiration 
of this Agreement. Further, if after the expiration of one year of MESSA PAK insurance 
the Board is able to demonstrate that it could  furnish comparable long term disability and 
life insurance for the ensuing years at a lesser cost than MESSA PAK then it will be 
permitted to purchase such insurance for comparable benefits from another carrier and have 
the program revert to MESSA Choices  II. Any issue relative to whether MESSA PAK 
insurance is of lesser cost than some other carrier can provide is subject to arbitration in the 
event of disagreement, and the parties shall have full discovery consonant with the Michigan 
Court Rules relative to the costs of MESSA PAK insurance. The TEA's only obligation in 
obtaining such information shall be to request such information in writing from MESSA, a 
copy of which shall be provided to the District. 
EXAMPLE: 
The Board may bid life and LTD insurances under the same terms and conditions that 
existed under the 2011-2013 contract. If the total premium amount to provide such life and 
LTD coverages to teachers, when added to the published MESSA Choices II SuperCare1 
Revised, MESSA Dental and MESS A Vision* premiums (at the rates currently in effect 
when the Board bids the life and LTD insurances) would be less than the District's total 
premiums paid for MESSA PAK, then the District shall no longer be obligated to provide 
insurance coverages through  MESSA PAK. If this occurs, the District shall provide the 
insurance coverages and carriers specified in the 2011 -2013 contract, with the exception 
that it shall provide MESSA Choices II 
26.2 All of the insurances shall be Board paid for twelve (12) months for  each teacher who 
completes his/her contractual obligation, and on a pro -rated basis if less than his/her contractual 
obligation is completed, except as stated in the following paragraphs. 
A. Any teacher who commences an unpaid leave of absence on or after Ap ril 1, which shall 
continue for the remainder of the school year, shall have his/her fringe benefits paid by the 
Board through August 31 of the calendar year in which the leave commenced. 
B. Should April 1 not be a scheduled work day, an unpaid leave which commences at the end 
of the last scheduled work day for purposes of this Agreement will be considered to have 
commenced on April 1. 
C. For employees who go on leaves, the Board will sponsor direct-pay coverage by the teacher 
at group rates to the extent the insurance company will allow, up to a maximum of twelve 
(12) months. This provision applies only to health insurance coverage. Other coverages 
cease at the end of the month in which the leave begins. 
30th of the year in which he/she retires. The retiring teacher shall be reimbursed for 
MPSERS insurance premium co -pay amounts for July and August of the year in which 
he/she retires. 
79  
215
D. The Board shall provide all insurances to a teacher who retires (after April 1) through June 
Formatted: Space After:  12 pt
26.3 Worker's Compensation. Any employee who is injured in the line of duty shall receive such 
compensation and expenses as prescribed by the Worker's Compensation Law of the State plus any 
other benefits from Social Security or public sources. Such compensation shall be supplemented with 
an amount sufficient to maintain his/her regular pay for a period not to exceed sixty (60) calendar days, 
without deduction of his/her accumulated sick leave. 
ARTICLE 27. SALARY SCHEDULE APPLICATION 
27.1 Professional Growth. Professional growth salary adjustments shall be paid a s follows: 
Effective after the start of the 2009 -2010 school year, a teacher shall only be allowed to advance to 
BA+20, MA, MA+30/EDS, PHD/EDD. However, teachers currently on eliminated lanes MA+10 and 
MA+20 and current teachers that have successfully completed classes for MA+10 and MA+20 before 
the start of the 2009-10 school year, will be grandfathered in accordance with the September deadline 
in Article 27 G. Teachers on eliminated lanes as of June 30, 1997, i.e. BA+15, BA+25, MA+5, MA+15 
and MA+25, and BA+30 as of December 14, 1971, have been red -circled and shall not be forced to 
move to another lane during the term of this contract. Only teachers hired on or before December 14, 
1971, are allowed to advance to BA+30. Courses applicable for professional growth shall be those 
acceptable to: 
A. an accredited (North Central or regional equivalent) college or university's own 
undergraduate or graduate degree program. All coursework must be submitted to the 
District on the institution’s official transcript according to the following: 
1. graduate level (post baccalaureate) classes 
2. BA level classes that will lead to an additional endorsement must be pre-approved 
by the Assistant Superintendent or Director of Employee Services. 
B. For classes successfully completed by the first day of the school year and recorded in the 
Board office by the last Friday in September, payment shall start on the second (2nd)  pay 
Friday in October. 
In the event that evidence of course  completion is not on record by the fourth Friday of 
September, but is received by February 15th, then payment shall be postponed until the 
spring adjustment period. 
In either event all monies shall be retroactive to the first day of school. 
In the event that evidence of course completion is not recorded by February 15th, but is 
received by June first, then payment shall be postponed until the last pay in June. 
In either event all monies shall be retroactive to the first day of the spring semester. Payment 
shall be one-half the yearly professional growth rate. 
endorsement (which requires 21 credit hours).  Teachers who receive this endorsement and 
have completed at least 21 post masters credits will realize a permanent MA+30 lane 
advancement and will not be expected to obtain the remaining nine (9) credit hours needed 
to achieve their MA+30 lane advancement.  Teachers who receive a masters in ESL only 
need to complete an additional 21 credit hours to advance to a MA+30 lane. 
80  
216
C. For classes successfully completed by the first day of the spring semester and recorded  in 
the Board office by February 15th, payment shall begin on the second pay Friday in March. 
D. Teachers who have a masters (MA) may pursue an English as a Second Language (ESL) 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0.49", Hanging:  0.38", Right: 
0.22", Widow/Orphan control
Formatted: Space After:  12 pt
Formatted: Space Before:  12 pt
27.2 Rules for Applying Schedules. 
A. Credit for outside experience shall be applied to all new hires uniformly consistent with 
administrative procedures. If the procedures currently in effect are to be changed, the TEA 
is to be notified, in writing, of the new procedures p rior to March first of the school year 
preceding the effective date of the change. 
81  
217
B. Credit for partial years of teaching will be given to the nearest full or half step according to 
the following formula: 
1. .1 and .2 to lower full step 
2. .3, .4, .6 to one-half step 
27.3 Increments. 
A. The increment adjustment shall be made and reflected in the first paycheck in September. 
B. The first increment adjustment for longevity shall be made and reflected in the first 
paycheck of September or February based on the following dates of hire: 
1. For persons hired no later than September 30, the anniversary  date of hire shall be 
September 1 of that year. 
2. For persons hired after October 1, but no later than April 1, the anniversary date of 
hire shall be February 1 of that year. 
The above referenced dates of hire apply only to longevity payments and do not reference 
another issue in the master agreement (i.e., seniority). 
27.4 School Psychologists' and School Social Workers Rate of Pay (Applicable only to School 
Psychologists and School