ies, and the maintenance of its functions and operations are 
reserved to the Employer and that all lawful prerogatives of the Employer shall remain and 
be solely the Employer’s right and responsibility.  Such rights and responsibilities 
belonging solely to the Employer are hereby recognized prominent, among which, but by 
no means wholly inclusive, are: All rights involving public policy,  
3 
132
the rights to decide the number and location of schools and other buildings, work to be 
performed within the TESA/MEA/NEA, amount of supervision necessary, methods, 
schedules of work, together with the select ion, procurement, designing, engineering and 
the control of equipment and materials, and the rights to purchase services of others. 
Regular employees, when available, will be given first consideration for substitute or extra-
duty work. 
2.2 It is further recog nized that the responsibility of the Employer for the selection and 
direction of the working forces, including the right to hire, suspend or discharge for just 
cause, assign, promote or transfer, to determine the amount of overtime to be worked, to 
relieve employees from duty because of lack of work, or for other legitimate reasons vested 
exclusively in the Employer, subject only to the provisions of law and other express 
provisions of this Agreement as herein set forth.  
2.3 During the school year, there shall be in -service programs whenever they become 
necessary. When the District purchases new equipment, and/or software , training on said 
equipment and/or software (if necessary) shall take place on District time at no expense to 
the employee. New hires an d transferred employees shall be scheduled for training and 
support in their new positions within fifteen (15) work days of their start date in the new 
position whenever feasible. In addition, the parties agree to establish a standing committee 
to review a nd discuss necessary training and the process for meeting training needs of 
employees at least annually.  
ARTICLE 3.  HOURS OF WORK 
3.1 The normal hours of work each day shall be consecutive according to job description  
and classifications as listed in the Board of Education policies except that they must be 
interrupted by a lunch period for those persons working six (6) or more hours per day. 
Level V elementary secretaries shall only work fiv e (5) hours on all non -student days, 
including student half d ays/early-release days and teacher work days during the school 
year.  All Level V elementary secretary vacation, sick and personal time calculations or 
accruals shall be calculated presuming a seven (7) hour work day. 
It is understood that the Employer ma y elect to declare a hard shutdown during winter 
recess, midwinter recess, and/or spring recess. When the Employer elects to implement a 
hard shutdown, the Employer shall declare hard shutdown periods and which buildings will 
be shutdown prior November 1. 
Winter Recess. If a hard shutdown is declared for winter recess, a 52-week employee who 
plans to work shall notify the Employee Services Manager by November 15 that his/her 
worksite will be shutdown and he/she needs to be relocated to another worksite dur ing 
winter recess. The employee shall be notified of his/her alternate worksite by December 1. 
Mid-winter Recess . If a hard shutdown is declared for mid -winter recess, a 52 -week 
employee who plans to work shall notify the Employee Services Manager by January 15 
that his/her worksite will be shutdown and he/she needs to be relocated to another worksite 
during mid-winter recess.  The employee shall be notified of his/her alternate worksite by 
February 1.  
133
 
 
       
4 Formatted: Indent: Left:  0"
134
Spring Recess. If a hard shutdown is declared for spring recess, a 52- week employee who 
plans to work shall notify the Employee Services Manager by February 15  that his/her 
worksite will be shut  down and he/she needs to be relocated to another worksite during 
spring recess. The employee shall be notified of his/her alternate worksite by March 1. 
3.2 Except for part -time employees, the normal work week shall consist of five (5) 
consecutive days, Monday through Friday, inclusive. When and if conditions arise such that 
hours of work and shifts and/or work weeks must be changed, such changes shall be subject 
to negotiation. 
3.3 Work Shift. All employees shall be scheduled to work on a regular work shift, and 
each work shift shall have a regular starting and quitting time. 
3.4 Work Schedule. Work schedules showing the employee’s shifts, work days and hours 
shall be posted by the supervisor in each building. Except for emergency situations work 
schedules shall not be changed unless the changes are mutually agreed upon by the 
Association and the Employer. 
When there is a new employee, at the discretion of the immediate supervisor, the current 
employee shall be brought in at the regular higher rate of pay to train the new employee on 
the job, whenever the current employee is av ailable. An orientation period of one day will 
be provided. Additional time may be authorized by the administration. 
Employees whose standard workweek consists of forty (40) hours shall at their choice work 
forty (40) hours, workday to be eight (8) hours per day or thirty-five (35) hours, workday to 
be seven (7) hours per day, during the summer workweek and be paid for the time worked. 
3.5 Lunch Period. Where lunch programs exist within the elementary, middle and high  
schools, employees assigned to said building shall be entitled to a duty -free, uninterrupted 
lunch period of thirty (30) minutes per day. If there is no lunch program within the building, 
employees assigned to said building may schedule a duty -free, uninterrupted lunch period 
of up to sixty (60) minutes per day. Hours and weeks worked are exclusive of the scheduled 
lunch period. 
3.6 Rest Periods. All employees’ work schedules  shall provide fifte en (15) minute rest 
period during each one-half shift. The rest period shall be scheduled at the middle of each 
half shift whenever this is feasible. Employees who for any reason work beyond their regular 
quitting time into the next shift shall receive a fifteen (15) minute rest period before they 
start to work on such next shift. In addition, they shall be granted the regular rest periods 
that occur during the shift. 
3.7 Use of Substitutes. Provided a qualified substitute is available, reasonable efforts  will 
be made to assign a substitute at the Elementary and Middle School levels and in the High 
School Attendance Office when a secretary is absent for a half-day or longer.  
5
135
3.8 Emergency Situations. On days when students are excused due to “Acts of God” (snow, 
ice, cold temperatures, power outages),  or for safety reasons, secretaries are not required to 
report to work. Days when students are dismissed early due to an emergency situation  the 
secretaries shall be excused by the appropriate administrator, as soon as feasible. 
An absence on the first three days of closing due to “Acts of God”  shall be reported to the 
AESOP absence reporting system using reason code “Snow Day /Act of God Day .” 
Beginning with the fourth day and beyond of severe weather closing, the secretary’s absence 
shall be reported to AESOP and shall be charged to secretary’s earned vacation, 
accumulated leave, personal business, or at the employee’s option take day(s) without pay.   
3.9 Reporting Absences.  When an employee is going to be absent he/she must report  
the absence on the “AESOP” system at least  one and one -half (1.5) hours before the 
beginning of his/her shi ft starting time, and contact his/her immediate supervisor prior to  
the beginning of his/her shift to report said absence. The time requirement may be waived 
in the case of an emergency at the discretion of the Assistant Superintendent, Employee 
Services. 
6 
136
ARTICLE 4.   HOLIDAYS AND VACATIONS 
4.1 Holidays. 
A. Less than 52- week employees shall not be scheduled to work on the following listed 
holidays, which fall during the regular school year, but shall receive regular pay for 
these days: 
Labor Day 
Thanksgiving and Friday following 
Good Friday 
Memorial Day 
Independence Day. If a less than 52-week employee is scheduled to work the day before 
or after Independence Day, the employee will receive holiday pay for Independence 
Day. 
In addition, they shall receive pay for Christmas Day, New Year’s Day, and two (2)  
additional days, which are designated by the calendar, of the winter (Christmas) recess. 
B. 52-Week employees shall not be scheduled to work on the following listed holidays 
but shall receive regular pay for these days.  
Labor Day   
Thanksgiving Day and Friday following   
Christmas Day and one day before or after (coinciding with the school calendar)   
New Year’s Day and one day before or after (coinciding with the school calendar)  
Good Friday 
Memorial Day 
Independence Day 
In addition, they shall receive pay for two (2) additional days which are designated by 
the calendar, of the winter (Christmas) recess. 
C. Whenever any of the holidays listed above shall fall on a Saturday, the preceding Friday 
shall be observed as the holiday.  
D. Whenever any of the holidays listed above shall fall on a Sunday, the succeeding 
Monday shall be observed as the holiday.  
4.2 Holiday Work. If an employee works on any of the holidays listed above, he/she shall 
be paid the following premium rate: 
Double time for all hours worked or compensatory time off at the rate of two hours for 
each hour worked. 
7 
137
4.3 Vacations. Beginning July 1, 2013, employees will accrue vacation days. Employees  
will be eligible for vacation benefits upon completion of the probationary period. The time 
vacations will be taken is subject to the approval of the immediate supervisor. If the 
employee is unable to resolve the scheduling of vacation days with his/her immediate 
supervisor, he/she may appeal to the  matter to the Assistant Superintendent, Employee 
Services. 
Vacation time will be accrued based on the years of service within a bargaining unit 
position. 
 Vacation   Vacation  
 Pay   Days  
 Earned Total  Earned Per Total 
 Per Pay Days  Pay (26 Days 
Less than 52-Week Employees (20 pays) Earned 52-Week Employees pays) Earned 
   First Year of   
First Year of Employment 0.250 5 Employment 0.385 10 
   Fifth Year of   
Fifth Year of Employment 0.650 13 Employment 0.692 18 
   Tenth Year of   
Tenth Year of Employment 0.900 18 Employment 0.885 23 
1 week of each of the above is paid during the winter    
recess.      
52–week employees may elect up to three unused vacation days to be cashed out at the end 
of the fiscal year. 
Accumulated vacation, not to exceed ten days, may be carried to the succeeding fiscal year.  
When mid-winter recess is scheduled, 52 -week employees may request to take vacation 
days or time without pay (see Article 5.3 for time off without pay). Less than 52-week 
employees may request to receive vacation pay during mid-winter recess. 
4.4 By June 1st, all employees shall receive written notification of the exact days to be 
worked in the subsequent fiscal school year. Said notice shall be sent from the Employee  
Services Department with a copy to the immediate supervisor.  
4.5 Vacation Day Cash Out.  Employees retiring or giving appropriate two-week notice 
of resignation will be paid at their daily rate for accrued unused vacation days.   
8 
138
ARTICLE 5. SICK LEAVE 
5.1 Annual Leave. Upon completion of the sixty (60) working days probationary period, 
a total of twelve (12) leave days for less than 52- week employees and a total of fourteen 
(14) leave days for 52-week employees per year shall be allowed, without loss of pay, for 
the following reasons:  
1. Personal illness (Leave days are not permitted to be used by less than 52- week 
employees for elective surgery during the school year.)  
2. Serious illness in the immediate family, which includes spouse, children and the  
members of the employee’s household, parents, foster parents of the employee or 
spouse, and brother and sisters of the employee.  
3. Death of a relative  
4. Three of the annual leave days may be used for personal business for less than 52-
week employees; four of the annual leave days may be used for personal business 
for 52-week employees, not including activities for pleasure.  
5. The employee may borrow in advance from the following year’s annual leave 
allowance by executing a promissory note in favor of the School District, said note 
to be cosigned by the Association.  
5.2 Accumulated Leave Days.  All the unused leave days shall be added at the end of  
each fiscal year to the employee’s leave day reserve, provided that such leave day reserve 
shall not exceed a total of one hundred eighty (180) days . Said leave day reserve may be 
used for reasons 1, 2 and 3 above and/or as a basis for calculating severance pay  of one 
half of a maximum of eighty (80) days of accumulated leave upon termination of 
employment in the Troy School District, providing the employee has five or more years of 
active service with the District. In addition, an employee who is leaving employment with 
the District for purposes of immediately activating his/her retirement from the Michigan 
Public School Employees Retirement System, shall be eligible to accrue and calculate 
severance pay on an additional twenty (20) leave days upon termination of employment. 
Said leave day accrual and severance calculation shall be done on the same basis as the 
first eighty (80) leave days. Severance pay will not be paid in cases where two weeks’ 
notice of leaving was not given or where illegal conduct by the emp loyee is involved. In 
case of death, the employee’s beneficiary or  beneficiaries as stated on the retirement card 
shall receive all benefits due the employee. 
Terminal Pay. All employees who retire with ten or more years of service in Troy shall, 
at their option, be paid terminal pay as set forth below in lieu of severance pay for 
9 
139
accumulated sick leave. An employee who opts to receive severance pay for accumulated 
sick leave shall not be eligible for terminal pay.  
10-14 years of service - $1,000.00  
15-19 years of service - $100/year of service  
20 or more years of service - $150/year of service 
In case of death, an employee’s beneficiary shall be paid the employee’s severance pay for 
one half of a maximum of eighty (80) days of  accumulated sick leave or the employee’s  
terminal pay, whichever is greater. 
5.3 Absence from a Paid Workday. When an employee is absent from a paid workday,  
he/she shall not receive his/her salary for such day unless his/her absence is covered under 
Article 5.1. 
Should it become necessary for an employee to take time off without pay, the employee 
shall submit a request for time off without pay to the Assistant Superintendent, Employee 
Services at least five days before the date(s) requested. Permission may be granted: 
1. If the absence(s) does not hinder the operation of the department.  
2. If the employee has not developed a habit of misuse of this opportunity.  
If the Assistant Superintendent, Employee Services denies the request, the employee may 
appeal the denial to the Superintendent, whose decision is final and binding, and not subject 
to the grievance procedure. 
Should an employee absent himself/herself after permission has been denied, he/she is 
subject to disciplinary action. 
5.4  Adjustment Due to Unfinished Contract.  Employees who leave the employment of 
the Troy School District before terminat ion  of the curre nt year’s operation for reasons 
other than those beyond his/her control will forfeit one leave day for each school month 
remaining at the date of termination of services, whether or not such leave days have 
already been used. Adjustment for such forfeiture shall b e made on the employee’s final  
paycheck. 
5.5  Worker’s Compensation.  Any em ployee who is injured in the line of duty shall  
receive such compensation and expenses as are prescribed by the Worker’s Compensation 
Law of the State of Michigan, plus any other benefits from Social Security or other public 
sources. Such compensation shall be supplemented with an amount sufficient to maintain 
his/her regular salary for a period not to exceed sixty (60) calendar days, without reduction 
of accumulated sick leave. In al l cases it is the em ployee’s responsibility to fill out the 
necessary forms, including requesting sick leave without reduction when applicable. 
5.6 Absence Due to Court Appearance. In a case connected with employment in the 
Troy School District or due to being subpoenaed on any proceeding connected with 
10 
140
school, the employee will be paid for the court or hearing appearance without being 
charged sick leave or business leave days. 
If an employee must serve on jury duty, he/she will be paid the difference between his/her 
jury pay and his/her regular pay, without loss of leave days. 
5.7 Absence Due to Illness Resulting from Contact with Children at School. If the  
contagious contact can be traced, the employee will be paid (without deduction from sick 
leave days) in cases of diseases such as mumps, measles, scarlet fever, whooping cough, 
chicken pox, head and body lice, hepatitis, pin worms and scabies, but not for diseases such 
as influenza, flu, colds, coughs or any other diseases.  
5.8 Absence Due to Religious Observances may be deducted from current sick leave as 
personal business days up to a maximum of three more days of leave than normally allowed 
for personal business.  
5.9 Approved attendance at conferences or conventions or other educational meetings, 
including in-service training, will not result in deduction from leave days but will be paid 
for in accordance with Board Policy.  
5.10 When an employee’s absence due to injury or illness exceeds forty (40) days beyond 
his/her accumulated sick leave, the seniority credit for these excess days shall not be 
counted.  
ARTICLE 6. LEAVES OF ABSENCE 
6.1 Eligibility Requirements. Employees shall be  eligible for leaves of absence after  
serving a probationary period of sixty (60) working days with the Employer, provided that 
such leaves of absence shall be subject to the discretion of the Employer, and provided 
further, that such leaves of absence sha ll not be granted if the efficient operation of the 
District would be thereby jeopardized.  
6.2 Application for Leave. Any request for a leave of absence shall be submitted in  
writing by the employee to the Assistant Superintendent, Employee Services with a copy 
to the employee’s immediate supervisor. Th e request shall state the reason the leave of 
absence is being requested and the length of time off the employee desires.  
Authorization for a leave of absence shall be furnished to the Employee by the Assistant 
Superintendent, Employee Services and shall be in writing with a copy to the employee’s 
immediate supervisor, and to the TESA/MEA/NEA President. 
Any request for a leave of absence shall be answered promptly. Requests for immediate 
leaves (for example, family sickness or death) shall be answered before the end of the shift 
on which the request is submitted. 
11 
141
A request for a short -term leave of absence--a leave not exceeding one month --shall be 
answered within five days. A request for a leave of absence exceeding one month shall be 
answered within ten days. 
6.3 Leaves of Absence for a limited period of time not to exceed one year may be granted. 
Upon termination of said leaves of absence, the employee shall be reinstated to his/her 
former position, or one reasonably equivalent thereto, if he/she requests reinstatement in 
writing at least thirty (30) calendar days before the expiration of the term of such leave.  
6.4 Medical Leave. The Employer will grant a leave of absence for medical or maternity 
reasons without pay and benefits to any regular employee upon written request. Such leave 
of absence shall be for a period of up to one year and may be renewed upon request for one 
additional year. Upon return to regular employment, the employee will be assigned to 
his/her previous position or t o one similar to it.  It is the employee’s responsibility to 
request in writing reinstatement to his/her former positio n or one equivalent. This should  
be done at least thirty (30) calendar days before such leave is terminated.  
6.5 An employee shall not accrue seniority while on an unpaid leave but shall retain  
previously accrued seniority. 
6.6 An employee shall accrue seniority while using paid sick leave days. An employee 
who is absent beyond his/her accumulated paid sick leave days shall continue to accrue 
seniority until he/she is placed on an unpaid leave of absence.  
6.7 An employee who takes a day(s) off without pay as provided for in Section 5.3 shall 
not lose seniority for the day(s) off.  
6.8 Employees requesting leaves of absence, pursuant to the Family Medical Leave Act 
of 1993 (FMLA), who are found eligible, will be required to exhaust certain paid leave 
entitlements for which they may otherwise be eligible under the terms and conditions of 
the collective bargaining agreement during their FMLA leave time. The rights established 
by the FMLA will not diminish any employee benefit programs or plans or paid leave 
provisions dictated by the terms of the collective bargaining agreement.  Further, any rights 
afforded by the FMLA w ill not be used to expand an employee’s  contractual rights and 
benefits, provided those rights and benefits meet or exceed the basic requirements of the 
FMLA.  
ARTICLE 7.   WAGES 
7.1 Wage Schedule. Employees shall be compensated in accordance with the wage  
schedule attached to this Agreement and marked Appendix A. The attached wage schedule 
shall be considered a part of this Agreement. 
12 
142
7.2 Employees shall move from the minimum step in the pay range to the maximum step  in 
annual increments or fractions of increments where appropriate, except that the Employer may 
give credit up to Step 5 on the appropriate schedule for previous educational secretarial 
experience or up to Step 3 on the appropriate schedule for previous non-educational secretarial 
experience in placing a new employee at an appropriate step. 
Employees hired between July first and December thirty -first shall be given a full 
increment in July. Example: Date of hire = September 10, 1985, increment given July, 
1986. 
Employees hired between January first and  June thirtieth shall be given an increment the 
second July of employment, as well as a lump sum increment payment from anniversary 
date of hire to June thirtieth. Example: Date of hire = March 10, 1986, Step adjustment = 
July 1, 1987, and lump sum increment adjustment from March 10, 1987, through June 30, 
1987. 
7.3 Pay Period. The salaries and wages of employees shall be paid biweekly on Friday  
(or earlier) of the appropriate week . In the event this day is a holiday, the preceding day 
shall be the payday.  
7.4 Employees will have the option to escrow with the district a percentage, determined 
by the employee, of his/her wage to be paid back to the employee when the employee 
requests it. The Payroll office shall be notified in writing by the employee at least two  
weeks before the first pay  day in the employee’s work year of this election . Having once 
made the election the option shall continue from year to year unless changed in writing by 
the employee at least two weeks before the first pay day in the employee’s work year. 
7.5 Mileage. When it is necessary for the TESA/MEA/NEA employees to use a  personal 
car for school business, the reimbursement shall be at the maximum non-taxed rate allowed 
by IRS.  
7.6 Work Performed in an Upgraded Position. At such times when it becomes necessary 
to perform work in an upgraded position (e.g., due to the absence of the secretary who 
normally performs such assignment), beginning on the eleventh day in the upgraded 
position during any given school year, the employee will be paid at the rate of pay for the 
upgraded position.  
7.7 Longevity. The Employee’s hire date with the District shall be used to calculate Longevity.  
Longevity changes will be made on July 1st of each year based upon the Employee’s calendar 
year of hire.  After ten (10) years in the Troy School District an employee shall earn $.85/hour 
in addition to their current wage on the wage scale; after fifteen (15) years in the Troy School 
District an employee shall earn $1.10/hour in addition to their current wage on the wage scale; 
and, after twenty (20) years in the Troy School District an employee shall earn $1.45/hour in 
addition to their current wage on the wage scale. For example, an employee hired April 1, 2008 
will receive ten (10) year Longevity July 1st, 2018.  An Employee hired on November 1, 2016 
will receive ten (10) year Longevity effective July 1st, 2026. 
13 
143
ARTICLE 8.  OVERTIME 
8.1 Rate of Pay. Time and one-half the employee’s regular hourly rate of pay shall be paid 
for work under any of the following conditions, but  compensation shall not be paid twice 
for the same hours. 
A. All secretarial and clerical work performed in excess of thirty (30) hours per week or 
six hours per day or the regular hours specified in Appendix B, whichever is greater , 
or on Saturday  
B.  All work performed on Sunday shall be double the employee’s regular hourly rate of 
 pay, except as described below: 
The overtime rate specified above for Saturday and Sunday work shall not be paid to 
employees for whom these days fall regularly within the first five days of their work 
week. These employees shall be paid a rate of not less than one and one half (1.5) hours 
for each hour worked or double time for all work performed on the sixth or seventh 
day, respectively, of their regular work week. 
C. Work performed on holidays shall be paid at double the employee’s regular hourly 
  rate of pay. 
8.2 Work at Employee’s Option.  Overtime work shall be voluntary except in the instance 
when a teacher workday falls on a Saturday in June. When a teacher workday falls on a 
Saturday in June, one elementary clerical staff member, one middle school clerical staff 
member and two high school clerical staff members shall be required to work overtime in 
each building. 
8.3  All overtime work must be approved in writing by the employee’s immediate 
supervisor in advance. This overtime will be paid at the overtime rate. If there is a necessity 
for continuous overtime, this should be brought to the attention of the supervisor and the 
Assistant Superintendent, Employee Services to determine whether there is a need for an 
increase in weekly hours.  
8.4  The District shall allow compensation time consistent with the requirements of the  
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) currently a rate of not less than one an d one half (1.5) 
hours for each hour worked. Subject to written approval by his/her immediate supervisor, 
an employee may request compensation time in lieu of monetary compensation for all pre-
approved overtime worked. A supervisor’s denial of a n employee’ s request for use of 
compensation time may not be subject to the grievance procedure, but may be appealed to 
the Assistant Superintendent, Employee Services. 
ARTICLE 9.  SENIORITY 
9.1 Probationary Period. The District shall provide the employee with the tentative date 
when his/her probation period of sixty (60) working days will end at the time of his/her 
employment. During a sixty (60) working day probationary period, the Employer 
14 
144
shall have the sole right to discharge and issue disciplinary action. The grievance 
procedures hereinafter established shall not be applicable to probationary employees. 
9.2 After the expiration of the sixty (60) working day probationary period, the employee 
shall be placed on the seniority list, retroactive to his/her first day of regular employment. 
In the event two or more persons begin work on the same date, the date/time of hire will 
be used to determine the order of the seniority listing.  
9.3 Seniority Date shall be the most recent date of hire for a TESA/MEA/NEA position. 
In the event two or more employees have the same date of hire, their ranking shall first be 
determined by previous service in a bargaining unit position. The most previous service 
shall rank first. If two or more employees still have  the same seniority rank after the 
previous service application, the seniority rank shall be determined by a lottery system. 
The Employer shall advise the Association President and the tied employees at least five 
weeks before the lottery. The employees sh all be permitted to draw a number. The lower 
number shall cause the ranking to be first. If the employee does not participate in the lottery, 
the President of the Association shall draw a number.  
9.4 An employee who is a member of the unit and leaves to take  a position in another 
union or an exempt position with the Employer and returns to the unit shall receive 
seniority credit for the prior service in the unit, but shall not accrue seniority while out of 
the unit.  
9.5 The seniority list signed by the Association President and the Employer 
representative is the official seniority list as of March 1, 1982. All future seniority lists 
shall be based on that list as may be updated as provided for in this Agreement.  
9.6 Other than as specifically provided here or in A rticle 6, seniority credit will be 
counted only for continuous service within the unit.  
9.7 Seniority for the purposes of longevity only shall be total service to the Employer. 
9.8 An up-to-date seniority list shall be maintained by the Employer. Two copies of the 
seniority list shall be furnished to the Association President on or about October first and 
March first each year. The seniority list shall include date of hire in ranked order, 
classification, and step on the salary schedule.  
9.9 Loss of Seniority. Seniority shall be broken, and the employee shall be removed from 
the seniority list only for the following reasons:  
A.  If the employee withdraws from employment. 
15 
145
B. If he/she is discharged, and the discharge is not reversed through the grievance process 
of this Agreement.  
C. If he/she is absent for three consecutive working days without notifying the Employer 
and fails to give an explanation for the ab sences and lack of notice which are 
satisfactory to the School administration.  
D. If he/she fails to return to work from a layoff when recalled from layoff, or fails to return 
from a leave upon expiration of the leave, within ten consecutive working days.  
E. If he/she overstays a leave granted for any reason, as provided in this Agreement, an 
acceptable, reasonable extended time beyond granted leave time should be given 
consideration, providing the request for extension is made prior to the expiration of the 
leave.  
ARTICLE 10.  LAYOFF AND RECALL 
10.1 When a reduction of employees in bargaining unit positions is deemed necessary by 
the Employer, it shall first attempt to accomplish the necessary reduction by normal 
attrition.  
10.2 At least three weeks prior to the n otice of layoff, the Employer shall meet with the 
Association to provide reasons for the layoffs and to discuss any alternatives.  
10.3 The procedure for involuntary layoff shall be:  
A. The employee(s) in position(s) that are being eliminated will be declared surplus.  
B. The least senior employees shall be laid off to accommodate the number of positions 
eliminated.  
C. The positions vacated by the laid-off employees shall be posted and fille d pursuant to 
Article 11. Promotions and Transfers.  
D. The District shall not be required to have more than two rounds of postings in 
accommodating the layoff situation; thereafter, the District shall meet with the 
employee(s) not slated for layoff who do not have an assignment, and after individual 
consultation beginning with the most senior surplus employee, shall determine 
placement to one of the remaining positions.  
E. If a position is not filled because no applicant met the qualifications listed in the 
posting, then the District shall make one or more transfers (as per Article 11.4 Transfer) 
among existing staff to fill the position. However, it is understood and agreed that no 
transfer shall occur under this section which results in a loss of pay to the transferee, 
unless the transferee wishes to do so. Thi s hold harmless provision from loss in pay 
shall only continue for an amount of time not to exceed the length of time the transferee 
held the position from which he/she was transferred. This hold   
16 
146
harmless provision and the pay/income protections herein shall not apply to any 
employees hired into a TESA bargaining unit position after June 30, 2011. If a position 
cannot be reasonably filled by transfers, and there is a person on layoff who is qualified 
to fill the position, the laid-off person shall be recalled and assigned to the position. 
F. In the event an employee who has taken a new position under this Section is not 
performing the duties of the new position satisfactorily after a period of sixty (60) 
calendar days, the District after consultation with the Union, shall make the necessary 
reassignments. 
10.4 A surplus employee may elect to take a layoff rather than receive a new assignment 
as provided in Section 10.3.  
10.5 The Employer shall send written layoff notices to the employees that will be laid off 
at least three weeks prior to the effective date of the layoff.  
10.6 Laid-off employees shall retain recall rights for three years or the length of their 
seniority at the ti me of layoff, whichever is less. In the event an employee who has been 
laid off is mailed a notice of recall by certified mail, return receipt requested, to his/her last 
known address on file in the Administrative Center, and such employee does not notify the 
Employer in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, within ten days after such 
offer of recall of his/her acceptance, then such employee shall have no further rights of 
reinstatement unless approved by the Employer in writing.  
It is understood that it is an employee’s  responsibility while on layoff to keep the 
Employer informed in writing of his/her current address, and his/her failure to do so 
constitutes a waiver of his/her reinstatement rights. 
10.7 The order of recall shall  be most senior recalled first. Employees recalled shall be  
reinstated with their adjusted date of first employment, their accumulated sick bank 
entitlement, if applicable, and on the appropriate step on the salary schedule in effect for 
the employees at the time of layoff. 
In the event a TESA position vacancy occurs and the District determines that it will recall 
a laid-off TESA member, the open position will be posted. All active TESA members who 
meet the posted qualifications shall be eligible to apply for the position. The District is not 
obligated to post any resulting vacancies. 
10.8 Employees who receive new assignments as a result of a layoff situation or are 
recalled must be qualified for the position. An employee is considered qualified if he/she 
meets the qualifications listed in the posting used to fill the position.  
10.9 In order to provide for recall, the Employer shall make transfers when necessary that  
do not result in reducing the transferred employee’s income. 
17 
147
10.10 Normal attrition may include voluntary leaves or voluntary layoff. If this section is 
to be used, the Association President shall be notified and the Employer and the 
Association shall work out the specific procedures to be followed.  
10.11 In all cases the off icial TESA/MEA/NEA seniority list dated March 1, 1982, shall 
be used. This list is on file with the Employer and the Association.  
10.12 A secretary who is laid off and who is paid unemployment compensation benefits 
associated with his/her regular clerical assignment during the summer immediately 
following the layoff, and who is subsequently recalled to a bargaining unit position by 
September fifteenth (15th) of the following school year, will be paid his/her regular wage 
less the amount of unemployment compensation. The total of unemployment compensation 
plus salary earned by employment in the District shall not be below that which the 
employee would have received had she/he been employed the entire school year.  
ARTICLE 11.  PROMOTIONS AND TRANSFERS 
11.1 Promotions shall be made on the basis of demonstrated ability to perform the task, 
meritorious service, and length of continuous service. Job vacancies shall be posted for a 
period of seven calendar days, excluding Saturday and Sunday, in a conspicuous place in 
each building in the School District. Job postings will contain the qualification criteria for 
the position. Employees interested shall  apply within the posting period. All internal 
applicants who meet the posted qualifications will be interviewed and notified of a decision 
within fifteen (15) administrative working days of the expiration of the posting. Any 
employee receiving the promoti on shall be given a trial period of up to sixty (60) days. 
Employees who fail to qualify shall be returned to their former position without loss of 
seniority. The Employer supports a policy of promotion from within; however, this shall 
not prevent the School District from disqualifying the employee.  
11.2 New Position or Change. When a new position is created or a significant change in 
the method of operation, and the position or change has been posted, a temporary rate shall 
be established by the School Distri ct for the probationary period. During this period the 
School District and the Association shall bargain on the rate of the position.  
Temporary assignments of more than sixty (60) consecutive working days and vacated 
positions must be filled no later than thirty (30) days following the start of the temporary 
assignment or employee job termination, providing proper notice is given to the 
Administration. If the above provision is not met, the Administration will meet with the 
Association to discuss the reasons therefore. 
Temporary assignments of sixty (60) or less consecutive working days may be filled as 
determined by the Employer. 
11.3 The minimum qualifications for employees shall include graduation from high school 
or its equivalent and the knowledge of office skills. 
      18
148
11.4 Transfer. Any employee may file a request for a transfer with the Assistant  
Superintendent, Employee Services at any time. A regulation form may be provided by the 
Association. 
Employees are subject to transfer from position to position at the discretion of the Assistant 
Superintendent, Employee Services after consultation with the principal or other 
administrators involved. In general, unrequested transfers will not be made unless 
necessary, the best interests of the most children will be the final criterion in all cases. 
The President of the Association(TESA) and/or his/her designee shall be informed of a 
transfer being initiated and whether the transfer is requested or unrequested.  A meeting 
may be requested with the Assistant Superintendent , Employee Services to discuss said 
transfer. 
When it becomes necessary to make unrequested transfers, the Assistant Superintendent, 
Employee Services shall meet with the transferee before the transfer to show just cause, if 
requested. 
11.5 Vacant position. All open/vacant positions shall be posted within ten (10) working  
days of being vacated and the posting shall be sent to the Association President and/or 
her/his designee the same day the position is posted. The employer and the Association 
president and/or his/her designee will discuss and only with mutual agreement, extend the 
posting of a position beyond the ten (10) days of being vacated. Any decision by the District 
to not fill a vacated position will be communicated to the Association and the position shall 
be designated as a dormant position.  
11.6 The Association President and Treasurer shall receive notification via email for all 
TESA employee changes within five (5) working days of the change: New hires, transfers, 
retirements, promotions, resignation, leaves of absences lasting longer than 30 calendar 
days, etc.  
ARTICLE 12.  DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE 
12.1 Discipline. Disciplinary action or measures shall include only the following: 
Oral Reprimand  
Written Reprimand  
Suspension (notice to be given in writing)  
Discharge (notice to be given in writing) 
Disciplinary action may be imposed upon an employee only for reasonable and just cause. 
Any disciplinary action or measure imposed upon an employee may be pro cessed as a 
grievance through the regular grievance procedure. 
If the Employer has reason to reprimand an employee, it shall be done in a manner that will 
not embarrass the employee before other people. 
      19
149
12.2 Discharge. The Employer shall not discharge any employee without just cause.  The 
Employer may suspend the employee during the investigation. If the Employer feels there 
is just cause for discharge, the employee involved will be discharged. The employee and 
his/her Association representative will be notified in writing that the employee has been 
suspended and/or discharged. 
ARTICLE 13.  SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES 
13.1 Grievance Procedure 
A. A grievance is defined to be a complaint by an employee within the Association based 
upon an event or condition which is claimed or considered to be a violation, 
misinterpretation or misapplication of this Agreement.  
B. Nothing contained herein will be construed as limiting the right of any employee 
having a grievance to discuss the matter informally with any supervisory or administrative 
personnel and have the grievance adjusted without intervention of the Association, 
provided the adjustment is not inconsistent with the terms of this Agreement, and the 
Association has been given the opportun ity to be present at such adjustment. Likewise, 
nothing contained herein shall preclude the Employer from utilizing the grievance 
procedures set forth herein in connection with grievances.  
C. The Association is prohibited from processing a grievance on behalf of an employee 
or group of employees without his/her/their initiating the grievance.  
D. Grievances shall be settled in the following manner:  
Step 1. An employee with a grievance will firs t discuss it with his/her immediate 
supervisor with the objective of resolving the matter informally. An 
Association representative should be present during the discussion.  
Step 2. If the grievance has not been settled, it shall be reduced to writing and presented 
within five working days to the immediate supervisor or his/her designated 
representative who shall forthwith meet and adjust the grievance with the 
employee and the Association representative.  
Step 3. If the grievance remains unadjusted for five days after, it may be presented in 
writing by the employee or Association to the Assistant Superintendent, 
Employee Services within five days after the response of the department head 
with copies to the Associati on representative and immediate supervi sor. The 
Assistant Superintendent, Employee Services will set up a meeting to discuss 
the grievance within five working days. Within five working days after such 
meeting, the Assistant Superintendent, Employee Services shall give his/her 
answer in writing to the Association representative with copies to the employee 
and his/her immediate supervisor.  
Step 4. If the grievance is still unsettled, the Association may within fifteen (15) days 
after the Step 3 answer or date the answer is due submit the grievance to  
      20
150
arbitration. The rules of the American Arbitration Association shall govern the 
filings of the demand for arbitration, the selection of the arbitrator, the 
conducting of the hearing, and all other matters surrounding the arbi tration 
process.  
The power of the arbitrator stems from this Agreement and his/her function is to interpret 
and apply this Agreement and to pass upon alleged violations thereof. He/she shall have 
no power to add to, subtract from or modify any of the ter ms of this Agreement, nor shall 
he/she have any power or authority to make any decision which requires the commission 
of an act prohibited by law or violates the terms of the Agreement. 
The cost for the services of the arbitrator, including per diem expen ses, and the American 
Arbitration Association filing fees, shall be borne equally by the School District and the 
Association. All other expenses shall be borne by the party incurring them, and neither 
party will be responsible for the expense of witnesses called by the other. 
The arbitrator shall have authority in cases where a member has been discharged, 
disciplined or deprived of any compensation to reinstate with no full or partial 
reimbursement of compensation lost and to restore fully, partially or not at all, other rights 
and conditions of employment. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on 
the School District, the Association and the employee. 
13.2 Time Limits. No grievance shall be processed unless it is presented within ten (10)  
working days of its occurrence. The time limits set forth above in Steps 1 through 4 may 
be extended for good cause shown and mutual consent of the parties. Said extension shall 
be in writing by the party requesting the extension. The time limits set forth  herein or 
agreed upon shall be adhered to by both parties. If the Employer fails to respond to a 
grievance within the time limits set forth at any step, the employee may proceed to the next 
step. Any grievance not advanced to the next step by the employee and/or Association shall 
be deemed abandoned.  
13.3 Days. The term days shall mean scheduled workdays, Monday through Friday, 
exclusive of holidays, Winter (Christmas) Recess and Spring Break as identified by the 
Troy School District.  
13.4 Work Time, Grievance P rocess. Before commencing the investigation of any  
grievance (that requires action during the working hours), the Association or employee 
shall get the permission of his/her immediate supervisor. It is understood by the parties, 
however, that the investiga tion, presentation or consultation on grievances should be 
carried on outside working hours whenever possible. However, the grievant and one 
Association representative shall be released without loss of pay to take part in arbitration.  
13.5 Special Conferences. Special conferences for important matters will be arranged  
between the Association or individual employee and the Employer or its designated 
representative upon the request of either party. Such meetings shall be between at least two 
representatives of the Employer and at least two representatives of the Association.  
13.6 Any agreement reached between the School District and the Association is binding 
on all employees affected and cannot be changed by any individual.  
21
151
13.7 No grievance shall be filed or processed further by any employee or the Association  
after the effective date of the employee’s  resignation, unless the grievance arises out  of 
previous employment and is filed within ten working days (as per Section 13.2). 
ARTICLE 14. NEGOTIATION PROCEDURES 
14.1 Discussion of Non -agreement Items. It is agreed that items not covered by this  
Master Agreement but of common concern to the employees and administrators in the 
School District may be discussed from time to time. The practice of free and open 
discussion between employees and administrators is to be preserved and the formulation 
of a Master Agreement is not intended to limit the areas of discussion or concern.  
14.2 Negotiation Teams. In any negotiations herein described, neither party shall have  
any control over the selection of the negotiating or bargaining representatives of the other 
party and each party may select its representatives from within or outside the School 
District. It is recognized that no final agreement between the parties may be executed 
without ratification by a majority of the Board of Education and a majority of the 
membership of the Association, but the parties mutually pledge that representatives 
selected by each shall be clothed with all necessary power and authority to make proposals, 
consider proposals and make concessions in the course of negotiations or bargaini ng, 
subject to only such ultimate ratification.  
14.3 Mediation. The Board of Education and the Association agree to follow the course 
of action specified in the law, should the parties fail to reach an agreement.  
14.4 Negotiation Time.  Negotiations shall be carried on at times mutually agreed upon  
and essentially outside of the employee’s regular working period. 
14.5 Caucus. At any time in the course of negotiation, each team may caucus separately  
and briefly.  
14.6 Sharing Data. During negotiations, the Employer and the Association shall present  
relevant data, exchange points of view and make proposals. The Employer shall make 
available to the Association for inspection all pertinent public records of the School 
District, excluding confidential records.  
14.7 Use of Outside Consultants. Either party may, if it so desires, utilize the services of 
outside consultants and may call upon professional and lay representatives to assist in the 
negotiations. If either party intends to use such consultants, it will notify the other party at 
least five days in advance of such use or a shorter time by mutual agreement.  
14.8 Meeting Location. It is agreed that negotiation meetings will be held at such places 
as may mutually be agreed upon.  
14.9 Record of Negotiation Session. Agree ments reached during each negotiating  
session shall be reduced to writing. It is understood, however, that such writings will be   
22 
152
edited and refined during the course of the collective bargaining preparation and that all 
such agreements are tentative and may be abandoned later in the negotiations in favor of 
some other item. 
ARTICLE 15. STRIKE PROHIBITION 
During the term of this Agreement, the Association agrees that it or the employees shall 
not authorize, sanction, condone or acquies ce in any strike as defined by applicable law. 
Strikes shall also be defined to include slowdowns, stoppages, sit -ins, picketing, boycotts 
or interference of any kind whatsoever with operations at any of the facilities of the Troy 
School District. This provision is not intended to interfere with or preclude any employee 
from free speech picketing when school is not in session. 
ARTICLE 16. INSURANCE 
For all seniority employees working regularly thirty (3 0) or more hours per week, the 
Employer agrees to pa y the maximum allowable premiums for twelve (12) months on 
policies that will provide the coverage listed below. A ll employees hired to work twenty 
(20) hours or more but fewer than thirty (30 ) hours per week shall receive prorated fringe 
benefits paid by the Employer equivalent to the percentage of the  time the employee is 
scheduled to work. The Employer’s contribution for prorated benefits shall be on the basis 
of the following schedule: 
 Percentage of Fringe Benefits 
Hours per week Paid by Employer 
20-24.9 Hours 50% 
25-29.9 Hours 75% 
30 plus hours 100% 
The nature, amount, extent, commencement, duration and term of benefits and coverage 
shall be as provided in the insurance policies and rules a nd regulations of the insurance 
carriers. The Employer’s only obligation shall be to pay the required premiums.  Any claim 
settled between the employee and any of the carri ers shall not be subject to the grievance 
procedure of this collective bargaining agreement. 
23 
153
A. MESSA PAK  
PAK A HEALTH INSURANCE  
1. Medical. An employee choosing Pak A at his/her option shall be enrolled in one 
of the following health care plans.  
MESSA Choices II PPO/MESSA ABC1/ MESSA ABC2 . MESSA Choices 
$500/$1,000 in- network deductible and $1,000/$2,000 out -of-network 
deductible. MESSA ABC1 $1,300/$2,600 deductible and $2,600/$5,200 out-of-
network deductible. MESSA ABC2 $2,000/$4,000 in- network deductible and 
$4,000/$8,000 out –of-network deductible.  
If the health insurance carrier requires an employee who is eligible  for 
MEDICARE to make MEDICARE payments, thereby reducing the District’s 
monthly health insurance premium, the District w ill reimburse the employee 
the amount of his/her MEDICARE premiums.  
In the event a national health insurance plan is enacted by Congress, which 
duplicates existing coverage at an additional cost to the Employer, Article 17 
shall be reopened for purposes of negotiation upon the request of either party to 
this collective bargaining agreement.  
2. Vision/Dental/Life/LTD Coverage . Effective January 1, 2014, the District 
will pay the actual cost of these insurances at the current benefi t levels for 
eligible employees. 
3. Dental Care. Each employee shall be enrolled in dental coverage, with 
coverage at 80/80/80/80, $800 annual limit $1,000 orthodontia limit.  
4. Vision.  Each employee shall be enrolled in vision coverage.  
5. Life Insurance. Each employee regularly working twenty (20) hours or more  
per week shall be enrolled in a Life insurance policy, which includes  
AD & D term life insurance, in the amount of $31,000, (inclusive of the $5,000  
provided with the enrollment in a medical insurance plan through MESSA). Such  
insurance may be converted to some type of individual life insurance plan upon  
termination of employment according to the policy (insurance) provisions.   
An employee’s eligibility for this life insurance benefit shall be subject to the  
insurance carrier’s exclusions, if any, and appropriate schedule of benefits. 
6. Long-Term Disability Insurance. Each employee regularly working twenty 
(20) hours or more per week shall be enrolled in long term disability insurance. 
The policy will cover the employee after the first sixty (60) calendar d ays or 
after the exhaustion of his/her accumulated leave days, whichever comes later, 
of any illness or disability. Such insurance shall pay two thirds (2/3) of his/her 
regular salary subject to a maximum benefit of $2,400/month and reduced by  
24
154
an amount paid or payable under Worker’s Compensation, Social Security and 
any School sponsored pension plan. The remuneration under this Article is as 
established under the company’s policy and is paid at the daily rate (7 
days/week, 52 weeks/year) of 1/365ths of the annual salary of the employee. 
7.  Employer Contribution Cap. Employees hired into TESA positions before July 
1, 2011. During the term of this Agreement,  the District shall pay the annual 
maximum amount allowable by PA 152 toward the total cost of the medical and 
prescription premiums for the plans offered.  The Board and Association agree 
to convene annually to review plan coverage offerings and employee premium 
contribution amounts consistent with PA 152.   
Employees hired into TESA positions on or after July 1, 2011.  During the term 
of this Agreement, the District shall pay the annual maximum amount allowable 
by PA 152 toward the total cost of the medical and prescription premiums for 
single subscriber coverage for the plans offered.  Employees hired after July 1, 
2011 may purchase up to two-person or full family coverage at their expense.   
Any remaining health insurance premium costs will be paid by the employee 
via pre -tax contribution, as permitted by law. This employee pre -tax 
contribution, as permitted by law, will be deducted through payroll over 20 
consecutive pays beginning with the 2 nd pay date in September, unless 
otherwise mutually agreed by the parties.  
8.  Plan Change.  Upon provision of written notification to the School District,  
TESA may elect to move to a different health insurance plan. Once this notice 
has been received, the School District will take steps to notify the insurance 
carrier or plan administrator of such changes for implementat ion as soon as 
possible. 
PAK B 
1. Vision/Dental/Life/LTD Coverage. Effective January 1, 2014, the District will 
pay the actual cost of these insurances at the current benefit levels for eligible  
employees.  
2. Dental Care. Each employee shall be enrolled in dental coverage, with coverage  
at 80/80/80/80, $800 annual limit $1,000 orthodontia limit.  
3. Vision. Each employee shall be enrolled in vision coverage.  
4. Life Insurance. Each employee regularly working twenty (20) hours or more per  
week shall be enrolled in a Life insurance policy, which includes AD & D term life 
insurance, in the amount of $31,000. Such insurance may be converted to some 
type of individual life insurance plan upon termination of employment according 
to the policy (insurance) provisions.  An employee’s eligibility for this  life 
insurance benefit shall be subject to the insurance carrier ’s exclusions, if any, and 
appropriate schedule of benefits. 
25
155
5. Long-Term Disability Insurance. Each employee regularly working twenty (20)  
hours or more per week shall be enrolled in long term disability insurance. The policy 
will cover the employee after the first sixty (60) calendar days or after the exhaustion 
of his/her accumulated leave days, whichever comes later, of any illness or disability. 
Such insurance shall pay two thirds (2/3) of his/her regular salary subject to a maximum 
benefit of $2,400/month and reduced by an amount paid or payable under Worker’s 
Compensation, Social Security or any School  sponsored pension plan. The 
remuneration under this Article is as established under the company’s policy and is 
paid at the daily rate (7 days/week, 52 weeks/year) of 1/365ths of the annual salary of 
the employee.  
6. Cash in lieu of Health Insurance. Employees (who would otherwise be eligible  for 
health insurance) who do not elect to be covered by any Board- paid health insurance 
or any Board sponsored health insurance plan in the District shall receive additional 
salary in the following amount:  
If four or fewer employees elect the option - $900.00/year  
If five employees elect the option - $2,000.00/year 
If six or more employees elect the option - $2,500.00/year  
The number of employees electing the option shall be determined at the close of 
business on the last day of the open enrollment period. The total amount shall be made 
in two payments. The first payment shall be paid to the employee in the second payroll 
in January. The second payment shall be paid to the employee in the second payroll in 
June. 
B. Annuity Insurance Plans. T he School District has made available annuity  
insurance plans for its employees. Interested employees must make the necessary 
arrangements for the plan direct with the carriers. Deduction for such plan must be 
by payroll deduction after formal written authorization.  
C. Health Insurance/Long-Term Disability Insurance/Worker’s Compensation.  
Up to the maximum amount of the School Dist rict’s annual health insurance 
premium contribution, the Board shall provide the employee with his/her health 
insurance benefit at no cost to the employee for the first twenty -four months the 
employee is drawing long -term disability insurance, subject to the rules of the 
insurance carriers and providing no such coverage is included in the carrier’s plan 
for employees drawing long- term disability. Up to the maximum amount of the 
School District’s annual  health insurance premium contribution, The Board shall  
provide the employee with his/h er health insurance benefit at no cost to the 
employee for the first twenty -four months the employee is drawing worker’s 
compensation, subject to the rules of the insurance carriers and providing no such  
26
156
coverage is included in the carrier’s plan for employee’s.  Following the first twenty-
four month period, the employee may purchase t he hospitalization insurance at 
his/her own expense at the employer’s group rate, subject to the rules of the carrier. 
D. Health Insurance Committee. The School District and TESA will establish a joint 
committee to explore health insurance options. Further, if any of the health 
insurance changes agreed to by the parties throughout this article (Article 16) 
prohibits the School District from recouping per pupil funding from the state based 
upon “best practices,” then the parties will meet in good faith for the purpose of  
agreeing to a resolution which will allow the District to recoup the per pupil 
funding.  
ARTICLE 17. MASTER SICK BANK 
17.1 Master Sick Bank. The procedure for the administration of the Master Sick Bank 
shall be in accordance with the following provisions and shall be for the use and benefit of 
all eligible employees who apply and whose applications are subsequently approved for 
sick day(s) benefits.  
17.2 Funding of Sick Bank. The Master Sick Bank shall be funded in accordance with 
the following provisions: 
A. Each employee shall contribute one sick day to the Master Sick Bank in January 1985, 
to fund the Bank.  
B. Employees newly employed by the District shall have one sick day of their advance 
current allowance transferred to the Master Sick Bank at the beginning of their 
employment.  
C. The maximum number of days in the Master Sick Bank shall be twice the number of 
employees working in the bargaining unit positions.  
D. The above one sick day transferred to the Master Sick Bank from the current allowance 
of an employee, or any other sick days so transferred, shall not be deducted from the 
days remaining in the Master Sick Bank at the time an employee terminates 
employment with the District.  
E. If the number of days in the Master Sick Bank falls below twenty -five percent (25%) 
of the maximum funding of days prior to the end of any school year, the 
TESA/MEA/NEA will notify the Board to make a transfer of one more day from each 
employee’s current allowance to the Master Sick Bank. 
17.3 Master Sick Bank Eligibility. Any employee shall be eligible to make application  
to the Sick Bank Committee for sick days of benefit after the employee has been employed 
and worked a minimum of six m onths and has at least one half of the employee’s current 
annual sick leave allowance at the commencement of the first illness during any one 
contract year.  The employee must be incapacitated for at least fifteen  
27
157
(15) consecutive working days and must have exha usted all days available in the 
employee’s personal sick leave accumulation before drawing on the Master Sick Bank. If 
an employee is incapacitated for at least fifteen (15) working days (not necessarily 
consecutive working d ays) in any one year and there is a further incapacitation which 
appears to be a recurrence of the same illness or accident and the same licensed physician 
who originally handled the case verifies by written statement that such incapacitation is a 
recurrence, then the fifteen (15) consecutive day eligibility requirement can be waived in 
such instance at the discretion of the Sick Bank Committee. In the instance of a recurrence 
of an illness, the employee may change physicians provided that prior approval is obtained 
from the Assistant Superintendent, Employee Services.  
17.4 Application. Each application for sick days of benefit from the Master Sick Bank  
must be submitted on the Sick Bank Application Form to the Sick Bank Committee, and 
such application will be  approved or reject ed on the bas is of the individual employee’s 
circumstances. All applications must be accompanied by supporting statements from a 
licensed physician. 
17.5 Sick Bank Committee. The Sick Bank Committee shall be composed of four  
employees to be selected in any manner determined by the TESA/MEA/NEA and one 
administrator to be selected by the Board. The TESA/MEA/NEA representatives shall hold 
membership on the committee for such terms as determined by the Association. Any 
application approval by the committee shall be by a majority vote of the entire committee.  
17.6 Administration. The Master Sick Bank shall be administered by the Sick Bank  
Committee in accordance with the following provisions:  
A. No employee shall be allowed more than t he number of days needed to satisfy the 
waiting period for LTD benefits from the Master Sick Bank in any school year.  
B. The form authorizing an award of sick days from the Master Sick Bank to an employee 
which is sent to the Board for payment must be accompanied by supporting statements 
from a licensed physician used by the committee in making their decision (for Board 
review) and signed by three members of the Sick Bank Committee and one of the 
following:  
1. President of the TESA/MEA/NEA  
2. Executive Director of the TESA/MEA/NEA  
Said forms shall be sent to the Board within five days of authorization. 
C. The records of the Master Sick Bank shall be audited at the end of each school year by 
a committee composed of three members, with one member each to be appointed by 
the Board, by the TESA/MEA/NEA, and by the Sick Bank Committee. A copy of the 
audit report shall be furnished to the Board, TESA/MEA/NEA and the Master Sick 
Bank Committee.  
28 
158
17.7 Board Retention of Sick Days. All sick leave days accumulated by any employee in 
his/her current allowance or those days transferred to the Master Sick Bank from his/her 
current allowance shall be subject only to the contingent liability of actual sick claim use 
by the employee or the Master Sick Bank. All sick leave days which are not used by the 
employee or the Master Sick Bank during the period of his/her employment shall not b e 
subject to any other type or kind of claim in any form whatsoever by the employee or the 
TESA/MEA/NEA when his/her employment has terminated. 
17.8 Sick Bank. The Board recognizes that the Sick Bank Committee’s decisions cannot 
be reversed by the Board. However, the committee’s d ecisions shall not be used as 
evidence or raised as an issue by either party during he arings over disciplinary action 
against the employee for alleged excessive absenteeism. 
ARTICLE 18. SEPARABILITY AND SAVING CLAUSE 
18.1 If any provisions of this Agreement should be held invalid by operation of law or by 
any tribunal of competent jurisdiction, or if compliance with or enforcement of any 
provision should be restrained by such tribunal pending a final determination as to its 
validity, the remainder of this Agreement or the application of such provisions to persons 
or circumstances other than those as to which it has been held invalid or as to which 
compliance with or enforcement of has been restrained, shall not be affected thereby.  
18.2 In the event that any provision is held invalid or enforcement of or compliance with 
which has been restrained, as above set forth, the parties affected thereby shall enter into 
immediate collective bargaining negotiations, upon the request of the Association and/or 
the Employer for the purpose of arriving at a mutually satisfactory replacement for such 
provision during the period of invalidity or restraint.  
18.3 The Association shall save the Employer harmless against any claims, demands,  
suits and other for ms of liability that may  arise by reas on of the Employer’s complying 
with any of the provisions of this contract. 
ARTICLE 19. GENERAL PROVISIONS 
19.1 Pledge against Discrimination and Coercion. The provisions of this Agreement  
shall be applied equally to all employees in bargaining unit positions without 
discrimination as to age, sex, marital status, race, color, creed, national origin or political 
affiliation. The Association shall share equally with the Employer the responsibility for 
applying this provision of the Agreement. 
All references to employees in this Agreement designate both sexes, and wherever the male 
gender is used, it shall be construed to include male and female employees. 
The Employer agrees not to interfere with the rights of employee s to become members of 
the Association, and there shall be no discrimination, interference, restraint or coercion by 
the Employer or any Employer representative or any employee against any employee 
because of Association membership or because of any employ ee activity in an official 
capacity on behalf of the Association or for any other cause. 
      29
159
The Association recognizes its responsibility as bargaining agent and agrees to represent 
all employees in bargaining unit positions without discrimination, interference, restraint 
or coercion. 
19.2 Mediation. The Employer specifically recognizes the right of its employees  
appropriately to invoke the assistance of the Michigan Employment Relations 
Commission pursuant to the provisions provided by law. 
19.3 Use of Facilities. The Association and its members shall have the privilege of  using 
school building facilities for meetings outside of school hours in the District as established 
by District policy. 
The interschool mailing system shall be made available to the Association and its members. 
19.4 Association Activities on Employer’s Time and Premises.  The Employer agrees  
that, during working hours on the Employe r’s premises and without loss of pay, 
Association representatives shall be allowe d to do the following things provided the 
Employer or his/her agent shall first approve any lengthy conferences and provided such  
conferences shall not substantially interfere with the employee’s performances of his/her  
duties. 
A. Post Association notices in  his/her own building. Transmit urgent communications, 
authorized by the Association or its officers, to the Employer or his/her representative.  
B. Consult with the Employer, his/her representative, Association officers or other 
Association representatives concerning the enforcement of any provisions of this 
Agreement.  
19.5 Work Rules. All existing work rules and practices shall be subject to discussion  
before being changed; all future work rules shall be subject to discussion before becoming 
effective: 
A. Revising. When existing rules are changed or new rules are established, they shall 
become effective, except in emergency, ten working days after being posted.  
B. Informing Employees . The Employer further agrees to furnish each employee in a 
bargaining unit position with a copy of the collective bargaining agreement and all 
existing work rules as soon as they are printed. New employees shall be provided a 
copy only at the time of hire.  
C. Enforcing. Employees shall comply with all reasonable rules that are not in conflict 
with the terms of this Agreement, provided the rules are uniformly applied and 
uniformly enforced.  
D. Notice of new hires shall be provided to the Association President or his/her designee 
within five (5) working days of the new hires’  active employment via email or inter -
school mail.  
30
160
Any unresolved complaint as to the reasonableness of any new or existing rule, or any 
complaint involving discriminatio n in the application of new or existing rules shall be 
resolved through the grievance procedure. 
19.6 Liability. Employees shall observe such rules concerning dealing with parents, 
school personnel and students as may be established by the Employer. In the event civil  
proceedings are brought against an employee while acting within the scope of his/her 
duties in the course of his/her employment, he/she will be provided legal assistance as 
provided under insurance carried by the Employer. Such insurance shall cover claims made 
regarding the dispensing of medications as requested by parents. 
19.7 Legal Counsel. Upon request of an employee who is assaulted as a result of his/her  
school duties, the Employer will provide preliminary legal advice but not representation.  
19.8 Reimbursement for Losses. An employee may apply to the Employer for  
reimbursement for loss, damage or destruction of clothing or personal property as a result 
of theft, vandalism or assault related to school duties, unless due to negligence or guilt of 
the employee, if such loss exceeds five dollars ($5.00) and is not cove red by insurance. 
Maximum reimbursement under this provision shall not exceed One Hundred Dollars 
($100).  
19.9 Membership Identification. No employee shall be prevented from wearing official 
insignia, pins or other identification of membership in the Associat ion either on or off 
school premises.  
19.10 Copies of Minutes, etc. At each regular and special Board Meeting, the Association 
will be provided copies of minutes of previous meetings, the Superintendent’s 
recommendations, monthly financial reports, the agenda and other public materials.  
19.11 Ethical Practices. The Association shall deal with any ethical problems arising  
within its membership, and the Employer recognizes the responsibility of the Association 
and its membership to define acceptable criteria of professional secretarial -clerical 
behavior. If, after due notice by the Administration of an employee’s violation o f 
acceptable ethical practices, the Association fails to take action, the Employer then may 
take appropriate action against the employee.  
19.12 Health Protection.  In order to provide continuing health protection for students  
and other school personnel: 
A. Upon initial employment each employee shall provide by certification of his/her private 
physician evidence of:  
1. Such state of physical and mental health that he/she is able to attend to his/her 
assigned duties without undue absence during the ensuing year.  
2. Freedom from active tuberculosis and other communicable diseases.  
31
161
B. When required by law, the employee will show evidence of his/her continued freedom 
from active tuberculosis by either tuberculin skin test or chest x-ray.  
C. Employees shall not be required to work under unsafe or hazardous conditions which 
endanger the health, safety or well-being of the employee as determined by applicable 
regulations properly adopted by OSHA, the Department of Labor (29 CFR 1960) or 
state or local agencies having jurisdiction. Employees who are required to continue to 
work shall be reassigned to work at another location at their regular rate of pay. 
19.13 Conflict and Incorporation into Existing Policies. The Agreement shall  
supersede any rules, regulations or practices of the Employer which shall be contrary to or 
inconsistent with its terms. The provisions of the Agreement shall be incorporated into and 
be considered part of the established policies of the Employer by reference.  
19.14 Terminating Employment. If an employee  anticipates  terminating  his/her  
employment in the Troy School District, he/she shall submit in writing a two weeks’ notice 
of leaving. 
19.15 Study of Position Relationships. The Assistant Superintendent, Employee 
Services will review the qualification section of the existing job descriptions for the 
purpose of updating said section. The review will be conducted in cooperation with the 
Association.  
19.16 The Association shall be provided twenty (20) days per year for their collective use 
for Association business, including attendance at conferences and workshops sponsored by 
the Association or affiliated organizations.  
19.17 Employees may request approval from the Assistant Superintende nt, Employee 
Services to take training courses in the use of office or word processing equipment or other 
clerical skills classes. If approval to attend a training course is obtained in advance of the 
course and if the employee successfully completes the c ourse, the employee will be 
reimbursed for the tuition and fees.  
The Assistant Superintendent, Employee Services retains the sole discretion in granting 
or denying approval to attend any training courses. 
                                                                        32 
162
Article 20.  DURATION, TERMINATION AND MODIFICATION 
20.1  This Collective Bargaining Agreement extension Agreement is made and entered 
into on this 197th day of June December 20176 by and between the Troy School District 
and the TESA/MEA/NEA, is effective July 1December 19, 20176 and shall remain in full 
force and effect through June 30, 202119.  In the event either party wished to terminate 
this Agreement or modify or amend any Article or Clause thereof, then notice to that 
effect shall be given in writing to the other party no less than sixty (60) days prior to the 
termination date of this contract. The modification or amendment of any specific Article 
or Clause shall not affect the remainder of this contract. 
20.2  If no notice of termination or modification is given by either party as provided for 
herein, then this Agreement shall automatically continue in full force and effect from year 
to year. 
20.3  Length of Collective Bargaining Agreement.  The body of the collective bargaining 
agreement is expected to last for a period of three and one half (3.5) years.  Items of the 
collective bargaining agreement which are considered in error may be reopened for 
negotiation only by mutual consent of both parties. The parties shall meet within four (4) 
months of the expiration date to consider the succeeding collective bargaining agreement.  
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have hereto set their hands and seals this day and 
year: 
Executed in the City of Troy, County of Oakland, State of Michigan, on the 197th day of 
June 2016December 2017. 
TROY BOARD     TROY EDUCATIONAL 
OF EDUCATION     SECRETARIES ASSOCIATION/ 
_________________________   ________________________ 
President      President  
__________________________    ___________________________ 
Assistant Supt. of Employee Services  Vice President 
33 
163
APPENDIX A 
July 1, 2016 –June 30, 2017 
 1 16.50 15.76  14.73 14.11 13.83  13.22  
 1.5 16.78 16.05  14.99 14.37 14.09  13.47  
 2 17.05 16.35  15.25 14.64 14.34  13.72  
 2.5 17.33 16.65  15.51 14.89 14.60  13.97  
 3 17.61 16.94  15.78 15.16 14.85  14.23  
 3.5 17.88 17.24  16.03 15.41 15.12  14.47  
 4 18.16 17.54  16.30 15.68 15.37  14.73  
 4.5 18.43 17.83  16.56 15.94 15.63  14.98  
 5 18.71 18.13  16.82 16.20 15.88  15.23  
 5.5 18.99 18.42  17.09 16.46 16.14  15.48  
 6 19.27 18.72  17.35 16.73 16.39  15.74  
 6.5 19.54 19.01  17.61 16.98 16.66  15.99  
 7 19.82 19.31  17.87 17.25 16.91  16.24  
 7.5 20.09 19.60  18.13 17.51 17.17  16.49  
 8 20.37 19.90  18.39 17.77 17.42  16.75  
 8.5 20.64 20.21  18.66 18.03 17.68  16.99  
 9 20.93 20.50  18.91 18.30 17.93  17.25  
 9.5 21.21 20.80  19.19 18.55 18.20  17.50  
 10 21.48 21.09  19.45 18.82 18.46  17.75  
 10.5 21.78 21.41  19.73 19.08 18.73  18.00  
 11 23.32 22.97  21.23 20.53 20.17  19.40  
2016-17 school year:  2 Full steps beginning July 1, 2016. 
34 
164
IA 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
APPENDIX A 
July 1, 2017 –June 30, 2018 
 1 16.50 15.76  14.73 14.11 13.83  13.22  
 1.5 16.78 16.05  14.99 14.37 14.09  13.47  
 2 17.05 16.35  15.25 14.64 14.34  13.72  
 2.5 17.33 16.65  15.51 14.89 14.60  13.97  
 3 17.61 16.94  15.78 15.16 14.85  14.23  
 3.5 17.88 17.24  16.03 15.41 15.12  14.47  
 4 18.16 17.54  16.30 15.68 15.37  14.73  
 4.5 18.43 17.83  16.56 15.94 15.63  14.98  
 5 18.71 18.13  16.82 16.20 15.88  15.23  
 5.5 18.99 18.42  17.09 16.46 16.14  15.48  
 6 19.27 18.72  17.35 16.73 16.39  15.74  
 6.5 19.54 19.01  17.61 16.98 16.66  15.99  
 7 19.82 19.31  17.87 17.25 16.91  16.24  
 7.5 20.09 19.60  18.13 17.51 17.17  16.49  
 8 20.37 19.90  18.39 17.77 17.42  16.75  
 8.5 20.64 20.21  18.66 18.03 17.68  16.99  
 9 20.93 20.50  18.91 18.30 17.93  17.25  
 9.5 21.21 20.80  19.19 18.55 18.20  17.50  
 10 21.48 21.09  19.45 18.82 18.46  17.75  
 10.5 21.78 21.41  19.73 19.08 18.73  18.00  
 11 23.55 23.20  21.44 20.74 20.37  19.59  
2017-18 school year:  1 Full Step Beginning January 1, 2018. 
            35 
165
IA 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
APPENDIX A 
July 1, 2018 –June 30, 2019 
 1 16.50 15.76  14.73 14.11 13.83  13.22  
 1.5 16.78 16.05  14.99 14.37 14.09  13.47  
 2 17.05 16.35  15.25 14.64 14.34  13.72  
 2.5 17.33 16.65  15.51 14.89 14.60  13.97  
 3 17.61 16.94  15.78 15.16 14.85  14.23  
 3.5 17.88 17.24  16.03 15.41 15.12  14.47  
 4 18.16 17.54  16.30 15.68 15.37  14.73  
 4.5 18.43 17.83  16.56 15.94 15.63  14.98  
 5 18.71 18.13  16.82 16.20 15.88  15.23  
 5.5 18.99 18.42  17.09 16.46 16.14  15.48  
 6 19.27 18.72  17.35 16.73 16.39  15.74  
 6.5 19.54 19.01  17.61 16.98 16.66  15.99  
 7 19.82 19.31  17.87 17.25 16.91  16.24  
 7.5 20.09 19.60  18.13 17.51 17.17  16.49  
 8 20.37 19.90  18.39 17.77 17.42  16.75  
 8.5 20.64 20.21  18.66 18.03 17.68  16.99  
 9 20.93 20.50  18.91 18.30 17.93  17.25  
 9.5 21.21 20.80  19.19 18.55 18.20  17.50  
 10 21.48 21.09  19.45 18.82 18.46  17.75  
 10.5 21.78 21.41  19.73 19.08 18.73  18.00  
 11 23.79 23.43  21.66 20.94 20.58  19.79  
2018-19 school year:  1 Full Step beginning January July 1, 20189. 
2018-19 school year:  off-schedule payment of $300 paid in first full November payroll period. 
166
IA 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
36 
APPENDIX A 
July 1, 2019 –June 30, 2020 
 1 16.67 15.92  14.88 14.25 13.97  13.35  
 1.5 16.95 16.21  15.14 14.51 14.23  13.60  
 2 17.22 16.51  15.40 14.79 14.48  13.86  
 2.5 17.50 16.82  15.67 15.04 14.75  14.11  
 3 17.79 17.11  15.94 15.31 15.00  14.37  
 3.5 18.06 17.41  16.19 15.56 15.27  14.61  
 4 18.34 17.72  16.46 15.84 15.52  14.88  
 4.5 18.61 18.01  16.73 16.10 15.79  15.13  
 5 18.90 18.31  16.99 16.36 16.04  15.38  
 5.5 19.18 18.60  17.26 16.62 16.30  15.63  
 6 19.46 18.91  17.52 16.90 16.55  15.90  
 6.5 19.74 19.20  17.79 17.15 16.83  16.15  
 7 20.02 19.50  18.05 17.42 17.08  16.40  
 7.5 20.29 19.80  18.31 17.69 17.34  16.65  
 8 20.57 20.10  18.57 17.95 17.59  16.92  
 8.5 20.85 20.41  18.85 18.21 17.86  17.16  
 9 21.14 20.71  19.10 18.48 18.11  17.42  
 9.5 21.42 21.01  19.38 18.74 18.38  17.68  
 10 21.69 21.30  19.64 19.01 18.64  17.93  
 10.5 22.00 21.62  19.93 19.27 18.92  18.18  
 11 23.79 23.43  21.66 20.94 20.58  19.79  
2019-20 school year:  1 Full Step beginning July 1, 2019. 
2019-20 school year:  off-schedule payment of $1000 paid in first full November payroll. 
167
IA 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
37 
APPENDIX A 
July 1, 2020 –June 30, 2021 
 1 16.83 16.08  15.03 14.39 14.11  13.49  
 1.5 17.12 16.37  15.29 14.66 14.37  13.74  
 2 17.39 16.68  15.56 14.93 14.63  14.00  
 2.5 17.68 16.98  15.82 15.19 14.89  14.25  
 3 17.96 17.28  16.10 15.46 15.15  14.52  
 3.5 18.24 17.59  16.35 15.72 15.42  14.76  
 4 18.53 17.89  16.63 16.00 15.68  15.03  
 4.5 18.80 18.19  16.89 16.26 15.94  15.28  
 5 19.09 18.49  17.16 16.53 16.20  15.54  
 5.5 19.37 18.79  17.43 16.79 16.46  15.79  
 6 19.66 19.10  17.70 17.07 16.72  16.06  
 6.5 19.93 19.39  17.96 17.32 16.99  16.31  
 7 20.22 19.70  18.23 17.60 17.25  16.57  
 7.5 20.49 19.99  18.49 17.86 17.52  16.82  
 8 20.78 20.30  18.76 18.13 17.77  17.09  
 8.5 21.05 20.62  19.04 18.39 18.04  17.33  
 9 21.35 20.91  19.29 18.67 18.29  17.60  
 9.5 21.64 21.22  19.58 18.92 18.57  17.85  
 10 21.91 21.51  19.84 19.20 18.83  18.11  
 10.5 22.22 21.84  20.13 19.46 19.11  18.36  
 11 23.79 23.43  21.66 20.94 20.58  19.79  
2020-21 school year:  1 Full Step beginning July 1, 2020. 
2020-21 school year:  off-schedule payment of $1000 paid in first full November payroll. 
38 
168
IA 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
 
169
Appendix B 
CLASSIFICATIONS    
Hours per Week Weeks per Year 
Level I Secretary   
Deputy Superintendent, Teaching and Learning (IA) 40 52 
Employee Benefits (IA) 40 52 
Communications and Strategic Initiatives 40 52 
Level II Secretary   
Athletic Director/Career & Tech Education 40 52 
Niles Accounting .5/NCHS .5 40 52 
Elementary Principal’ (12) 37.5 45 
High School Principal 40 52 
Middle School Principal-3 40 46 
Middle School Principal  40 52 
Employee Services –AESOP Operator 40 52 
Special Education Director 40 52 
Information Services Department 40 52 
Central Enrollment 40 52 
Purchasing Supervisor 40 52 
Level III Secretary   
District Media Secretary 40 44 
High School AP/DP 40 46 
High School Guidance 40 44 
Special Education Data Processor 35 52 
Special Education Data Processor (.5) 17.5 45 
CO Receptionist/Business DP 40 52 
Student Growth /Equity & Accountability 40 52 
TRC Director 40 52 
Level IV Secretary   
Adult & Continuing Education 40 52 
Career Room –Troy High 40 44 
High School Assistant Principal (6) 40 45 
Middle School Assistant Principal (4) 40 45 
Receptionist - Athens 40 52 
Special Education Supervisor 35 45 
Youth Services .25/Niles Enrichment .75 40 52 
397 
170
Maintenance & Operations Director 40 52 
40 52 
Level V Secretary   
Attendance 40 42 
Elementary (9) 26.25 42 
Elementary (3) 35 42 
Special Education 35 421 
Troy Career Center 40 52 
Niles –Youth Services 20 46 
Should any new bargaining unit positions be created, Schedule B shall be amended by the 
District to reflect the new positions. 
4038 
171
Appendix C 
                                                         Dormant Positions  
 Hours per Week Weeks per Year 
Level I Secretary   
Auxiliary Services Director 40 52 
Instruction & Pupil Accounting (IA) 40 52 
Elementary Instruction Asst. Supt. 40 52 
Fine Arts/Community Relations 40 52 
Payroll Senior Clerk 40 52 
Secondary Instruction Director 40 52 
Student Services Senior Clerk 40 52 
Level II Secretary   
Athletic Director 40 52 
Accounting 40 52 
Continuing Education Director 40 52 
Level III Secretary   
Career Education Services 40 44 
Coalition Director, Senior Student Services 40 52 
Curriculum Director 40 52 
District Media 40 44 
Evaluation & Research 40 45 
Fine Arts Director   
Guidance 40 44 
High School Data Processor 40 52 
Secretary III 40 52 
Department of Instruction and Assessment 20 52 
Vocational Education 37.5 52 
Vocational Education 20 52 
Level IV Secretary   
Accounting (1) 40 52 
Accounting (1) 40 52 
Career Room –Athens 40 44 
Coalition Director 40 52 
Evaluation/Media Director 40 52 
Food Services Supervisor 40 46 
High School Administrative Assistant 40 42 
High School Admin Assistant –Athletics 40 44 
Niles Alternative High School 40 45 
Planning & Construction Supervision 40 52 
Receptionist –Troy High 40 52 
State & Federal Projects Supervisor 40 52 
TCC Manager 40 52 
Central Office Receptionist 40 52 
NCHS .5/Enrichment .5 40 52 
Transportation Supervisor 40 52 
Accounting           40 52 
Receptionist –Central Office           40 52 
3941   
172
Level V Secretary   
Adult & Continuing Education 40 52 
District Media 35 40 
Guidance 40 42 
Health 40 42 
High School General 40 42 
High School Media 35 42 
Employee Services 40 52 
Media Technician Assistant 35 44 
Middle School 20 42 
PACE (Gifted & Talented) 40 42 
Purchasing 40 52 
Title I 40 42 
420 
173
Formatted: Indent: Left:  2.92"
TROY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
TESA & NON-REP SECRETARY EVALUATION FORM 
NAME:        BUILDING:  
SUPERVISOR:      DATE:   
H = Highly Effective E = Effective M = Minimally Effective      I = Ineffective  
N/A = Not applicable 
Competencies H E M I N/A 
Demonstrates depth of knowledge in performing the job ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Produces high quality results in work assignments ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Applies job knowledge to identify problems ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Prepares and maintains accurate and complete records ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Utilizes available resources to achieve job results ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Understands, applies and adheres to District/school policies, procedures and work rules ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Job Initiative and Professionalism H E M I N/A 
projects and initiates and takes actions for improvement 
or other challenges (adapts well to change in the work environment) 
Maintains confidential and privileged information ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
development opportunities related to job functions or responsibilities 
professional demeanor and workplace appropriate  
Arrives to work on time and adheres to daily work schedule ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Follows safe work practices and promptly reports safety hazards ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Communication Effectiveness H E M I N/A 
messages clearly 
Applies appropriate style, spelling, grammar and punctuation to written documents ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Practices exceptional communication skills including telephone and e-mail etiquette ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Demonstrates active listening skills ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Receives, initiates and gives feedback professionally ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Quality Customer (Principal/Teachers/Student/Parent) Service H E M I N/A 
regard to services 
Gives a high priority to customer satisfaction (availability, timeliness, responsiveness)  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Maintains composure, demonstrates constraints and self-control in difficult situations ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Task and Time Management H E M I N/A 
on time 
Minimizes the development of crisis ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Technology Proficiency H E M I N/A 
Exhibits adequate knowledge of technology and utilizes software systems ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Applies technology to maximize job performance ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
property by displaying proper and safe use of the equipment 
Teamwork and Collaboration H E M I N/A 
Treats all persons with respect and civility ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
174
Accepts, seeks and /or takes initiative for new responsibilities, assignments and/or 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Responds confidently to the demands of work when confronted with change, adversity 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Demonstrates a willingness to participate in the District’s offered professional 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Positively represents the District in the work place and public environment; exhibits 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Expresses self clearly, both orally and in writing, including conveying and receiving 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Anticipates customer’s needs and takes a proactive approach toward customers with 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Manages and prioritizes time and resources in order to successfully complete projects 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Exhibits proficiency in the use of computers and software systems and cares for District 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Delegates and/or shares responsibility and follows up to ensure success ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Values diversity and resolves conflicts professionally ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Develops and maintains professional relationships ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
others 
Demonstrates problem solving and decision making skills ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Comment Section:  Please attach an additional sheet if necessary 
Evaluator’s Comments of the staff member’s performance.  An overall Minimally Effective or Ineffective 
performance rating requires an Individual Development Plan (IDP). 
Employee’s Comments: 
I have had the opportunity to review this document and discuss its contents with my supervisor.  My 
signature acknowledges that I have been informed of my performance rating, but does not necessarily 
indicate agreement. 
175
4338 
Maintains high standards and quality of work sharing knowledge/experience freely with 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Formatted: Indent: Left:  0"
Employee’s Signature:                                                                                       Date:   
Evaluator’s Signature:                                                                                        Date:   
3944 
176
451 
 
 
177
INDEX FOR TESA CONTRACT FOR 2016-2019 
A  
Conflict in Policy (19.13) ......................... 32 
Absence (5) ............................................... 9 
Consultants (14.7) ..................................... 22  
Conferences (5.9) ............................. 11 
Contagious Disease (5.7) .......................... 11 
Contact with Children (5.7) ............. 11 
Court (5.6) ................................................. 10 
Court (5.6) ........................................ 10 
Illness (5.1).........................................  9 
Leaves (6) ......................................... 11 
D  
Days (13.3)……………………………… 21 
Non Paid Workday (5.3) .................. 10 
Personal Business (5.1) ...................... 9 
Dental Insurance (16 A) ............................ 24  
Religious (5.8) .................................. 11 
(16 A)…………………………………25  
Discharge (12.2) ........................................ 20 
Reporting (3.9) ................................... 6 
Just Cause (12.2) ................................. 20 
Seniority (5.10) ................................ 11 
Discipline/Discharge (12) ......................... 19 
Unauthorized (5.3) ........................... 10 
Unpaid (5.3) ..................................... 10 
Discrimination (19.1) ................................ 29  
Seniority (6.5) .................................. 12 
Disease (19.12) ......................................... 31  
Accumulated Leave Days (5.2) ................. 9 
Contagious (5.7) .................................. 11  
Disputes, Settlement (13) .......................... 20 
“Acts of God” Days (3.8)………………... 6 
Dormant Positions (Appendix C)…….4139-
Adjustment Due to Termination (5.4) .....  10 
AESOP (3.9)…………………………….    6  
420  
Agreement Duration (20.1) .....................  33 
Double-time (4.2) ........................................ 7  
Duration of Agreement (20.1) ................... 33 
Annuities (16 B ) ......................................  26 
Arbitration (13.1 D, Step 4) ....................  20 
Association Activities (19.4) .................. 30 
E  
Emergencies (3.8) ....................................... 6  
B  
Equipment, New (2.3) ................................. 4  
Ethics (19.11) ............................................ 31 
Bargaining Agent (1.1)..............................  3 
Benefits, Insurance (16) .......................... 23 
Evaluation Form……………………...43-44  
Experience Credit (7.2) ............................. 13 
Prorated (16) ..................................... 23 
Breaks (rest periods) (3.6) .........................  5 
Building Use (19.3) ................................. 30 
F  
FMLA (Family Medical Leave) (6.8) ....... 12  
C  
Facilities (19.3) ......................................... 30  
Caucus (14.5) .......................................... 22 
Family Medical Leave (6.8) ...................... 12  
Cash in Lieu (16 A)……………………. 26 
Fringe Benefits (16) .................................. 23  
Funding of Sick Bank (17.2) ..................... 27 
Change (11.2) .......................................... 18 
Claims (19.8)...........................................  31 
397-
G  
Conferences (5.9) .................................... 11 
(13.5) ................................... 21 
46
2 
178
Days (19.16) ..................................... 32 
Classifications (Appendix B) ............ 
3840 
Coercion (19.1) ....................................... 29 
Comp Time (4.2) .......................................  7 
(8.4) ..................................... 14 
Complaint (Grievance) (13.1) ................. 20 
Eligibility (MSB) (17.3)............................ 27  
General Provisions (19) ............................ 29  
Grievance Procedure (13.1) ...................... 20  
Conference (13.5) ............................... 21  
Time Limits (13.2) .............................. 21  
Work Time (13.4) ............................... 21
 
 
THE INDEX IS NOT A PART OF THE COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT 
179
Length of Contract (20.3) ........................... 33 
Co-op................................................ 4145 
Illness (5.1) ........................................... 9  
Liability (19.6) ...........................................  31 
Inclement Weather (3.8) ....................... 6  
Life Insurance (16 A) ................................ 24 
Increment (7.2) .................................... 13  
(16 A) ................................. 25 
In-service (2.3) ...................................... 4  
Longevity (7.7) ........................................... 13 
Insurance (16) ..................................... 23  
Credit (9.7) ........................................ 15 
Dental (16 A) ................................ 24  
Long-term Disability (16 A) ...................... 24/26 
(16 A) ................................ 25  
Loss Reimbursement (19.8) ....................... 31 
Health (16 A) ................................ 23  
Loss of Seniority (9.9)................................  15 
Life (16 A) .................................... 24  
Lunch Period (3.1) ....................................... 4 
(16 A) ..................................... 25  
(3.5) ................................ 5 
Long-term Disability (16A)…...24/26    
Vision (16 A) ................................ 24  
(16 A) ................................ 25  
M  
Application (17.4) ................................    28 
Maternity Leave (6.4) ............................     12 
J  
Mediation (14.3) ...................................    22 
Job Description (19.15) ....................... 32  
        (19.2) ............................................    30 
Jury Duty (5.6) .................................... 10  
Medical Leave (6.4) ..............................    12 
Just Cause Discipline/Discharge (12) .19 
Medication (19.6) ..................................    31 
Membership Identification (19.9) .........    31 
K 
MESSA PAK (Plan A)..........................    24 
        (Plan B) ........................................    25 
Involuntary (10.3) ......................... 16  
Notice (10.5) ................................. 17  
Recall Rights (10.6) ...................... 17  
Seniority (9) ........................................ 14  
Voluntary (10.10) ................................ 18 
473
THE INDEX IS NOT A PART OF THE COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT 
180
H  
Health Insurance (16 A) ...................... 24  
      Committee (16 D)………………..27  
National (16 A) ............................. 24  
Health Leave (6.4) .............................. 12  
Insurance (16 C) ............................ 26  
Health Protection (19.12) .................... 31  
Holidays (4.1) ....................................... 7  
Pay (4.2) ........................................... 7  
(8.1 C) .................................... 14  
Work (4.2) ....................................... 7  
Hours, Work (3) .................................... 4 
I  
Involuntary Layoff (10.3) ................... 16  
Involuntary Transfer (11.4) ................. 19 
L  
Layoff/Recall (10) ............................... 16  
Leaves (6) ................................................... 11 
   Accumulated (5.2) ................................ 9 
 Application (6.2) ................................ 11 
 Eligibility (6.1) .................................. 11 
Extension (9.9 E) .............................. 16 
Maternity (6.4) ................................... 12 
Medical (6.4) ...................................... 12 
Seniority (5.10) .................................. 11 
(6.5) (6.6) .......................... 12 
(6.7) ................................... 12 
Sick (5) ................................................ 9 
Legal Counsel (19.7) .................................. 31 
Letters of Agreement  
Management Responsibilities (2)…….      3 
Master Sick Bank (17) ..........................    27 
Mid-winter Recess (4.3) ........................      8 
Mileage (7.5) .........................................    13 
Minimum Qualifications (11.3) ................. 18 
Minutes (19.10) .......................................... 31 
 
N  
Negotiation Procedures (14) ...................... 22 
Caucus (14.5) ................................. 22 
Location (14.8) ............................... 22 
Non-agreement Items (14.1) .......... 22 
Records (14.9) ................................ 22 
Teams (14.2) .................................. 22 
Time (14.4) .................................... 22 
New Position/Change (11.2) ...................... 18 
 
O  
Options (7.4) .............................................. 13 
             (8.2) .............................................. 14 
Orientation (3.4) ...........................................   5 
Overlap Orientation (3.4) .............................   5 
Overtime (8) ............................................... 14 
          Approval (8.3) ................................ 14 
          Comp Time (8.4) ............................ 14 
          Rate of Pay (8.1) ............................ 14 
          Teachers’ Workday(8.2)………….  14 
          Voluntary (8.2) ............................... 14 
 
P  
Pay Period (7.3) .......................................... 13 
Payroll Deduction (16 B) ........................... 26 
 Personal Business (5.1 -4) .......................  9-10 
Physical (19.12) ......................................... 31 
Policy Conflicts (19.13) ............................. 32 
Postings (11.1) ........................................... 18 
 Preamble........................................................ 3 
Probationary Period (9.1) ........................... 14 
New Position (10.3 F) .................... 17 
Seniority (9) ................................... 14 
Promotions/Transfers (11) ......................... 18 
Trial Period (11.1) ...................................... 18 
Prorated Fringe Benefits (16) ..................... 23 
 
Q  
Qualification Minimum (11.3) ................... 18 
 
R  
Rate of Pay (8.1) ........................................ 14 
Rate, Temporary (11.2) .............................. 18 
 
484 
 
Recall (10) .................................................. 16 
Order (10.7) ........................................ 17 
Rights (10.6) ...................................... 17 
Recognition (1.1) ......................................... 3 
Reduction in Rank (10.1) ........................... 16 
Reimbursement for Losses (19.8) .............. 31 
Reinstatement from Leave (6.4) ................. 12 
Religious Observance (5.8) ........................ 11 
Reporting Absences (3.9) .............................  6 
Reprimand (12.1) .......................................  19 
Rest Period (3.6) .......................................... 5 
Retirement (5.2) ........................................... 9 
Rights, Management (2.2) ............................  4 
Rights to Representation (13.1) .................  20 
Rules, Work (19.5) ..................................... 30 
S  
Salary Continuance (16 A) ......................... 24 
Salary Schedule (Appendix A) ............ 
34-
386 
Schedules, Work (3.4) ..................................  5 
School Closings (3.8) ................................... 6 
Seniority (9) ...............................................  14 
Discharge, Absence, Layoff (9.9) ...... 15-16 
  Illness (5.10)...................................... 11 
List, official (9.2, 9.5, 9.8) ................. 15 
  Loss (9.9) .......................................... 15 
Lottery (9.3) ....................................... 15 
Prior Service (9.4) .............................. 15 
Probation Period (9.1) ........................ 14 
 Longevity (9.7) ................................. 15 
 Tie (9.3)……………………………. 15 
Separability & Saving Clause (18) ............. 29 
Settlement of Disputes (13) .......................  20 
Severance Pay (5.2) ......................................  9 
Sharing Data (14.6) .................................... 22 
Shift, Work (3.3) .......................................... 5 
Sick Bank (17.8) ........................................  29 
Sick Bank, Master (17) ..............................  27 
Administration of (17.6) .......................... 28 
Application (17.4) .................................... 28 
Committee (17.5) .......................................  28 
Eligibility (17.3) ......................................... 27 
Sick Days (5.1) .............................................  9 
Retention(17.7) ................................. 29 
 
THE INDEX IS NOT A PART OF THE COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT 
181
Sick Leave, Annual (5.1) ............................. 9 
Accumulated (5.2) .......................... 9 
Seniority Credit (5.10) ................... 11 
Termination (5.4) ........................... 10 
Signatures   ............................................... 33 
 Special Conferences (13.5) .................. 21 
 Staff Reduction (10.1) .......................... 16 
 Strike Prohibition (15) ......................... 23 
 Substitutes (1.1) ..................................... 3 
(2.1) ....................................... 3 
(3.7) ....................................... 5 
Orientation (3.4) ............................... 5 
Summer Hours (3.4) ............................... 5 
 Surplus Employees (10.3) .................... 16 
Placement (10.3 D) ........................ 16 
 
T  
TB Tests (19.12) .................................. 31 
Tax Sheltered Annuity (16 B) .............. 26 
Temporary Assignments (11.2) ............  18 
Terminal Pay (5.2) ................................. 9 
Termination of Agreement (20) ........... 33 
Termination Notice (19.14) ................. 32 
     (20.2) .................... 33 
Tie, Seniority (9.3) ............................... 15 
Time Limits (Grievance) (13.2) ........... 21 
Training (2.3) ......................................... 4 
Transfers (11) ....................................... 18 
     Involuntary (11.4) .......................... 19 
     Recall (10.9) ................................... 17 
     Requests (11.4) .............................. 19 
     Unrequested (11.4) ......................... 19 
     Voluntary (11.4) ............................. 19 
Trial Period (11.1) ................................ 18 
Tuition (19.17) ..................................... 32 
 
U  
Unauthorized Absence (5.3) ...................... 10 
Unemployment Comp (10.12) ................... 18 
Unfinished Contract (5.4) .......................... 10 
Updating Job Responsibilities (19.15) ....... 32 
Upgrade Work (7.6) ................................... 13 
Use of Facilities (19.3) ............................... 30 
 
V  
Vacancies/Postings (11.1) .......................... 18 
Layoff (10.3 C) ..................................... 16 
Vacations, Accumulated (4.3) ...................... 8 
Vacation Day Cash Out (4.5)……………… 8 
Vandalism (19.8) ........................................ 31 
Vision Insurance (16 A) ............................. 24 
(16 A) ............................. 25 
Voluntary Transfer (11.4) .......................... 19 
Layoff (10.10) ...................................... 18 
 
W   
Wage Schedule (7.1)…………………….. 12  
Wages (7)   ............................................... 12  
Upgraded (7.6) ..................................... 13  
Without Pay (5.3) ....................................... 10  
Work at Employee’s Option.(8.2)………….14    
Work Day (3) ...............................................  4  
Work Rules (19.5) ...................................... 30  
Work Schedule (3.4) .................................... 5  
Shift (3.3) ............................................... 5  
Work Time (13.4) ...................................... 21  
Workers’ Compensation (5.5)                               10  
Insurance (16 C) ................................... 26  
Supplement (5.5) .................................. 10  
 
X 
 
 
Y 
 
 
Z 
 
 
 
 
 
495 
 
 
THE INDEX IS NOT A PART OF THE COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT 
182
Business Services Update
Board of Education Workshop
December 19, 2017
183
2017-18 GF Budget Amendment #1
2
184
2017-18 GF Budget Revenue
3
185
2017-18 GF Budget Amendment #1 Revenue
GF Revenue by Source
State
$101,057,436
68%
Local 
State
Local 
Federal
$37,683,754
Incoming Transfer & Other Transactions
25%
Federal
Incoming 
$3,450,771
Transfer & Other 
2%
Transactions
$7,480,945
4
5%
186
2017-18 GF Budget Amendment #1 Revenue
Ø Local Revenue was not significantly impacted in this amendment:
Ø Note: Building Blocks Preschool revenue and related expenses were moved out of the General Fund and 
into the Adult and Community Education Fund – Net Impact ($103,000).
Ø State Funding increase of approximately 3%:
Ø MPSERS UAAL Stabilization State Aid Payment increase of $1.7 million
Ø Pupil increase of 170 from 12,900 to 13,070  increase of $1.5 million
Ø The Federal funding decrease of approximately 1.6%: 
Ø Decrease in the District’s federal grant awards (Title I, II, & III – Carryover not included).
Ø Interdistrict funding decrease of approximately 9%:
Ø Medicaid Fee for Service reduced ($125,000)
Ø Removed $650,000 transfer in from the Adult and Community Education Fund.
Ø All other revenue sources were not effected greatly in this amendment.
5
187
2017-18 GF Budget Expenditures
6
188
2017-18 GF Budget Amendment #1 Expenses
Ø Salaries remained consistent with the original budget. Benefits increased by 
approximately 2.9%, which is related to the increase in the MPSERS UAAL payment 
and other retirement costs.
Ø Purchased services increased by approximately 1.2%:
Ø Software licenses increase by $306,000
Ø Federal grants reconciled to actual awards and final prior year expenditures. 
Ø “Other” expenses decreased by approximately 43%:
Ø Decrease in property tax abatements and write-offs ($135,000).
Ø All other expenditures were not effected greatly in this amendment.
7
189
2017-18 GF Budget Amendment #1 Expenses
8
Salaries 
$ 73,021,841
0.49145012088749Benefits 
$ 47,787,472
0.321618279814495
Purchased Services 
$ 19,089,713
0.128477201246645
Supplies 
$ 6,046,879
0.0406965830338628
Capital Outlay 
$ 334,981
0.00225448236706347
Other 
$ 217,931
0.0014667148188599
Outgoing Transfers 
and Other 
$ 2,085,623
0.0140366178315845
GF Expense by Object
Salaries 
Benefits 
Purchased Services 
Supplies 
Capital Outlay 
Other 
Outgoing Transfers and 
Other 
190
9
FY
95
FY
96
FY
97
FY
98
FY
99
FY
00
FY
01
FY
02
FY
03
FY
04
FY
05
FY
06
FY
07
FY
08
FY
09
FY
10
FY
11
FY
12
FY
13
FY
14
FY
15
FY
16
FY
17
FY
18
FY
19
FY
20
14% 15% 15%
11% 11% 12% 12% 12% 13% 13%
15% 16%
18% 17% 17% 17%
21%
24%
27%
32%
36% 36% 36%
34% 34% 34%
0.24 0.245
0.26 0.26 0.26 0.26 0.26 0.26
After PA 300 of 2012
Prior to PA 300 of 2012
State Share
Note: Future projected rates are from Office of Retirement Services based on current actuarial 
valuation
House Fiscal Agency: January 2014
MPSERS Employer 
Contribution Rates History
And Future Projections
The state portion of the MPSERS contribution rate is nearly $1 Billion in FY 
2017-18
191
Budget Schedule
Ø December 5th: Board Budget Workshop
Ø January: Revenue Sharing Conference and Cabinet priority 
discussions 
Ø February: Governor’s Budget
Ø March – June: Develop 2018-19 Budgets and 2017-18 
Amendments
Ø May/June Board Meeting: Public Hearing and Millage Rate 
Adoption
Ø June Board Meeting: Budget Adoption
10
192
Questions
11
193
8.A.      12.19.17
8.        BUSINESS
           A.    CONSIDERATION:       2017 - 18 Budget Amendment Resolution
Attached is the Budget Amendment Resolution for the 2017 - 18 fiscal year for the General Fund.
We do not have to read the Budget Amendment Resolution in its entirety.  However, it must be 
made a part of the official minutes.
RECOMMENDED ACTION:       Adopt the following resolution.
SUGGESTED RESOLUTION
Moved By:  ____________________
Supported By:  ____________________
BE IT THEREFORE RESOLVED, that the general appropriations and
budget of the Troy School District for the fiscal year 2017 - 18 for the
following fund be amended and approved as attached hereto and
made a part of the official minutes of the December 19, 2017 regular
meeting.
Yes:  ___________
No:    ___________
194
General Fund 148,584,440$         
8.A.      12.19.17
BE IT RESOLVED, that the total revenues and unappropriated fund balance estimated to
be available for appropriations in the General Fund  of the Troy School District for the
fiscal year 2017 - 18 are amended as follows:
PROPOSED
ORIGINAL AMENDED
Revenues: BUDGET BUDGET CHANGE
State 97,760,866         101,057,436        3,296,570         
Federal 3,506,988           3,450,771           (56,217)            
Incoming Transfers/Other 8,200,393           7,480,945           (719,448)           
Transfers/Other
Available to Appropriate
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that $148,584,440 of the total available to appropriate in the
General Fund  is hereby appropriated in the amounts and for the purposes set forth below:
Expenditures:
Instruction:
Added Needs 17,245,604         17,019,881         (225,723)           
Adult/Continuing Education 859,510              1,039,035           179,525            
Support Services:
Instructional Staff 7,400,192           7,349,918           (50,274)            
General Administration 2,331,819           2,342,896           11,077              
School Administration 7,394,387           7,531,286           136,899            
Business Services 1,197,500           1,029,887           (167,613)           
Operations/Maintenance 9,385,957           9,409,542           23,585              
Pupil Transportation 3,512,836           3,355,397           (157,439)           
Central Services 2,269,499           2,367,243           97,744              
Support Services (Athletics and Other) 1,781,790           1,691,698           (90,092)            
195
Local 37,990,138$        37,683,754$        (306,384)$         
Total Revenues/Incoming 147,458,385$  149,672,906$  2,214,521$     
Fund Balance, July 1 22,335,432$     24,205,391$     1,869,959$     
Fund Balance 22,335,432$     24,205,391$     1,869,959$     
Total Available to Appropriate 169,793,817$  173,878,297$  4,084,480$     
Basic Programs 83,230,516$        84,579,947$        1,349,431$       
Total Instruction 101,335,630$  102,638,863$  1,303,233$     
Pupil 10,678,738         10,756,217         77,479$            
Total Support Services 45,952,718$     45,834,084$     (118,634)$      
8.A.      12.19.17
PROPOSED
ORIGINAL AMENDED
BUDGET BUDGET CHANGE
Outgoing Transfers/Other  
BEGINNING FUND
ENDING FUND
196
Community Services 141,796$            111,493$            (30,303)$            
Total Expenditures/ 147,430,144$  148,584,440$  1,154,296$     
EXCESS REVENUES 28,241$            1,088,466$       1,060,225$     
BALANCE JULY 1 22,335,432$     24,205,391$     1,869,959$     
BALANCE JUNE 30 22,363,673$     25,293,857$     2,930,184$     
 8. B. 12.19.17 
8. BUSINESS 
B.  CONSIDERATION:  Roofing Bid 
A RFP was issued to obtain competitive bids for roof replacement work 
at five district buildings.  Bid responses were reviewed by WeatherTech, 
the district roofing consultant, Michelle Kerns, and Rob Carson, and it is 
recommended the bid be awarded as stated below.  
 RECOMMENDED ACTION:  Accept the resolution below. 
SUGGESTED RESOLUTION 
 Moved by:   
 Supported by: 
 Be it therefore resolved that the bid for roof replacement be awarded as 
follows and that these amounts be approved as an expenditure of the 2016 
Capital Projects Fund. 
J. D. Chandler $  888,400.00 
Royal West $  473,500.00 
Contingency (10%) $  136,190.00 
TOTAL $1,498,090.00 
 Yes: 
 No: 
197
198
199
200
201
202
     8. C.      12.19.17 
8. BUSINESS 
 C. CONSIDERATION:  Asbestos Abatement  
  An RFP was issued to obtain competitive bids for asbestos abatement 
work at Costello, Martell, Morse and Leonard Elementary Schools.   The 
bids were reviewed by Mr. Rob Carson, Director of Operations, and it is 
recommended that the bid be awarded as stated below.   
RECOMMENDED ACTION:  Acceptance of the resolution below. 
SUGGESTED RESOLUTION 
Moved By: ______________________________ 
Supported By: ______________________________ 
Be it therefore resolved that the bid for asbestos abatement at Costello, Martell, 
Morse and Leonard Elementary Schools be awarded to NOVA Environmental, Inc. 
in the amount of $ 82,700.00.00 and that th is amount be approved as an 
expenditure of the 2016 Capital Projects Fund.   
Yes: ____________ 
NO: ____________ 
203
204
205
206
         8. D. 12.19.17 
8. BUSINESS 
 D. REPORT: EARLY CHILDHOOD CENTER 
Rick West, Assistant Superintendent of Business Services, and 
Kris Griffor, Assistant Superintendent of Elementary Instruction, 
will share a presentation on the development of the proposed 
Early Childhood Center.   
RECOMMENDED ACTION:  This is a report. 
207
November 28, 2017
1
208
ECC Aligning with our 
Mission, Vision, Values and Goals
2
209
Facility Design
Team / Defining the Issue
 Design Team includes:
 TSD Board of Education, TSD Administrators,  TSD Operations 
Staff, Teachers, Reading Specialists, English Language Teachers, 
Special Education Teachers, Parents, TMP Architecture, Barton 
Malow, Owners Representative.
 Defining the Issue
 Skills developed during the early years provide a strong launching 
pad for lifelong learning.
 Existing TSD elementary schools are operating at over 90% 
capacity leaving +150 pre-K students on waiting lists
 Elementary numbers continue to climb – 40% incoming 
kindergarten students
210
3
 400+ students are currently served
Facility Design – Guiding Principles
1. Provide spaces that encourage collaboration, movement, and 
exploration
2. Consider the scale of the new center that is not over-whelming for the 
young learner
3. Convenient access for students and parents that is direct and safe
4. Include interior and exterior spaces for gross motor development
5. Organize the new center into smaller learning communities to 
encourage “family groupings”
4
211
Facility Design – Guiding Principles
6. Provide learning spaces that are flexible, adaptable and stimulating
7. For ease of access, locate the new ECC in the geographic center of the 
district
8. The new center should include abundant natural light in all 
instructional spaces
9. The new center should be “Eco-Friendly that allows interaction with 
the natural environment
10. Provide professional space for teachers and staff to encourage teaming, 
collaboration, interaction observation
5
212
Site Key Notes
Cranbrook Natural Features
Natural Lighting
Natural Playground Equipment
Open-ended Play
L-shaped Classrooms
Ligget Large areas for student work displayed
Natural Materials
Outdoor classroom
Material storage in classrooms at student height
Novi Residential Look
Circle Drive
Clinic with restroom attached
Large spaces for student and staff collaboration
OT and PT Room
Speech Services
Visits
Moving Storage
Velcro Walls
Rooms for before and after school care
Expanded Playground
Fully functioning kitchen
New York City Public Schools Support rooms for teachers
Large block rooms for student use
staff and families
University Lab setting 
Large storage spaces
213
6
Early 
Childhood
Center 
Bloomfield ECC Large Classroom Space
Progressive Furniture
Interactive monitor in all rooms
MSU
Oakland University
Teachers College of Colombia University
Observation opportunities for classrooms
Reading Recovery Specifications
Community emphasis through collaborative spaces for 
Videotaping available for lesson review
Proposed Site – Niles Aerial View
7
214
Proposed Concept Site / Building Plan
8
215
Overall Plan
Design Development
Plan  
Development
o Classrooms
o Commons
o Administration
o Way-finding
9
216
                                                         VIDEO
217
Key Financial Priorities
1. Minimize Long Term Debt Obligation
a. Sale of Property
i. Section 23 = $4.3 million (Sold)
ii. Section 11 = $4.3 million (Purchase Agreement)
iii. Section 16 = TBD
iv. Section 1 = TBD
b. Program Net Revenue = Estimated $600K - $1 million Annually
c. Adult & Community Education Fund Balance
d. General Fund Net Revenue
e. Alternative Revenue Strategies (i.e. Sinking Fund)
2. ECC must be self-sustaining: Estimated $600K - $1 
million
11
218
Early Childhood Center
Project Schedule
Design and Construction 4/26/2017 8/10/2019 836 119
Design
     Survey 4/26/2017 5/24/2017 28 4
     Programming 5/25/2017 6/22/2017 28 4
     Schematic Design 6/23/2017 9/1/2017 70 10
     Design Development 9/2/2017 11/11/2017 70 10
     Construction Documents 11/12/2017 1/31/2018 80 11
     Bidding and Award 2/1/2018 3/20/2018 47 7
Construction 4/17/2018 8/10/2019 480 69
Occupancy 8/10/2019
12
219
Activity Start Date End Date
Duration 
(Calendar 
Days)
Duration
(Calendar 
Weeks)
Next Steps
1. December 19, 2017: Resolution of Commitment
2. December 2017-F ebruary 2018: Construction Documents 
and RFP Development Finalization
3. March 2018: Board Bid Awards
4. April 2018: Construction Begins
5. August 2019: Occupancy
13
220
8. E.   12.19.17 
8. BUSINESS 
E. CONSIDERATION:  Early Childhood Center 
 The District has been engaged in the process of designing an Early 
Childhood Center since August of 2016.  We offer this resolution for the 
Board of Education’s consideration to continue development of the Early 
Childhood Center.   
 RECOMMENDED ACTION:  Approve the resolution below. 
SUGGESTED RESOLUTION 
Moved By: ______________________________ 
Supported By: ______________________________ 
Whereas, the Troy School District Board of Education’s mission is to ensure learning for 
all members of the school community; and 
Whereas, the Troy School District Board of Education’s vision is to become a World Class 
educational entity by 2020; and 
Whereas, one (1) of the four (4) established pillars in becoming World Class by 2020 is 
Investing in the Learning of Pre-Kindergarten students; and   
Whereas, the District desires to develop an Early Childhood Center to service our Pre-
Kindergarten students; and  
Whereas, the Troy School District Board of Education as part of a resolution approved 
on March 21, 2017 appointed TMP Architecture as the Architect of record and authorized 
TMP Architecture to commence the design process for an Early Childhood Center in 
accordance with their submitted proposal for services dated March 10, 2017 and the cost 
of services is not to excee d $933,716 to complete phases 1 through 4 of the proposal 
and is approved as an expenditure of the Capital Maintenance Fund; and 
Whereas, the District has been engaged in a comprehensive and collaborative design 
process involving many stakeholders since March 2017, 
221
8. E.   12.19.17 
Now, Therefore, be it Resolved That:  
1. The School District authorizes the continued design development, preparation of 
construction documents, and bidding of an Early Childhood Center. 
2. The School District desire s to develop the  Early Childhood Center on the vacant 
land located on the current Niles Continuing Education site. 
3. The School District authorizes Administration to establish an Early Childhood 
Center Fund. 
4. The School District authorizes a transfer of $ 4,700,000 from the Capital 
Maintenance Fund into the Early Childhood Center Fund and the funds be restricted 
for the development of the Early Childhood Center. 
5. The School District directs revenue generated from any sale of property be tween 
date of this resolution through June 30, 2020 be deposited into the Early Childhood 
Fund and restricted for use in the development of the Early Childhood Center. 
6. The School District appoints Barton Malow Company as the Construction Manager 
of Record and authorizes Administration to finalize a contract with Barton Malow 
consistent with their proposal submitted for the bond work and that their services 
be approved as an expenditure of the Early Childhood Center  Fund Professional 
Services Budget.     
7. This resolution supersedes and replaces any and all previous resolutions in whole 
or in part that conflicts with this resolution.  
Yes: ____________ 
No: ____________ 
222
 10. A. 12.19.17 
10. OTHER 
A.  CONSIDERATION:    Board Governance Standards 
MASB’s Board of Education Governance Standards are intended to help  
support school boards in their efforts to govern responsibly and effectively 
on behalf of all students.  By adopting the Governance Standards, boards 
are taking an important step toward  demonstrating their commitment to 
governing effectively on behalf of students , p romoting greater self -
accountability; and providing a useful tool for the community to assess how 
the board is doing. 
 RECOMMENDED ACTION:  Accept the resolution below. 
SUGGESTED RESOLUTION 
 Moved by:   
 Supported by: 
 WHEREAS, 30 years of research on school district leadership has proven a 
correlation exists between the work of school boards and student 
achievement; and  
 WHEREAS, school boards in high‐achieving districts exhibit characteristics 
and practices that differ greatly from those in lower ‐achieving school 
districts regardless of socioeconomic status; and  
 WHEREAS, the Board of Education of the Troy School District is committed 
to governing the district in a manner that creates high achievement and 
positive outcomes for students; and   
 NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the Board of Education of the 
Troy School District adopts the Board of Education Governance Standards 
published by the Michigan Association of School Boards and, in doing so;  
 The Board of Education of the Troy School District commits to conducting 
itself in a manner consistent with the Board of Education Governance 
Standards; and   
223
 Individual members of the Troy School District Board of Education commit 
to conducting him/herself in a manner consistent with the Individual Board 
Member Standards; and   
 The Board of Education of the Troy School District  shall ensure the Board 
of Education Governance Standards are visible at every meeting, and  
 The Board of Education of the Troy School District shall visit and revisit the 
Board of Education Governance Standards regularly to ensure their 
continued influence in the board’s work, and  
 The Board of Education of the Troy School District  shall hold itself 
accountable to these standards, and  
 Individual members of the Troy School District  Board of Education shall 
address behaviors that are not in alignment with the Governance Standards.   
 Adopted this 19th day of December, 2017.   
 Yes: 
 No: 
224
 10. B. 12.19.17 
10. OTHER 
B.  CONSIDERATION:  Firearms in Public Schools 
The Michigan Legislature is actively revisiting legislative changes regarding 
allowing firearms in schools while Court review is pending.  The Board is being 
asked to consider adopting a r esolution urging state officials to include in any 
legislation that local school Boards determine whether they want to permit visitors 
to carry weapons on school grounds by declaring school grounds as a safety 
sensitive zone.  Students and empl oyees already are prohibited from carrying 
weapons on school property via other statutory provisions and board policies.   
RECOMMENDED ACTION:  Accept the resolution below. 
SUGGESTED RESOLUTION 
 Moved by:   
 Supported by: 
WHEREAS, as a result of numerous school shootings across the nation, 
including the tragedies at Columbine High School, Sandy Hook Elementary 
School, and subsequent school shootings involving staff and students, the issue 
of the presence of guns on school grounds,  at school sponsored activities, or 
while students are en route to or from school, has become an increasing 
concern for Michigan public schools;  
WHEREAS, the Federal Gun Free School Zones Act prohibits possession 
of a firearm in a school zone, but exempts an individual licensed to carry a 
firearm under state law. 18 USC 922(q)(2).   
WHEREAS, The Michigan Weapon Free School Zone Act similarly 
prohibits possession of a firearm on school property, but exempts an individual 
licensed to carry a firearm under state law. MCL 750.237a.  
WHEREAS, the Michigan Concealed Pistol Licensing Act prohibits an 
individual with a concealed pistol license from carrying a co ncealed pistol on 
school property. MCL 28.425o.  
WHEREAS, the State of Michigan has not enacted legislation expressly 
prohibiting individuals who possess a valid Concealed Pistol License (“CPL”) 
from openly carrying firearms in areas otherwise designated as “gun free school 
zones.”  
225
WHEREAS, a public school district is tasked under the Revised School 
Code to provide for the safety and welfare of its students and to educate 
students in a safe and nurturing environment.   
WHEREAS, the MDE Emergency Plan Tool Kit specifies procedures that 
schools should follow whe n a weapon is present on school grounds such as 
lockdown, as the same may constitute an emergency.  
WHEREAS, in Michigan Gun Owners, Inc. v. Ann Arbor Public Schools, 
318 Mich App 338 (2016) and Michigan Open Carry v Clio Area School District, 
318 Mich Ap p 356 (2016), the Michigan Court of Appeals found that school 
districts have the authority to promulgate policies that ban the possession of 
firearms on school property and at school-sponsored events.  
WHEREAS, on November 8, 2017, the Michigan Senate passed Senate 
Bills 584-586 which prohibit open carry and permit concealed carry on school 
grounds, day care centers, sports arenas, large concert halls, taverns, places 
of worship, hospitals, college dorms or classrooms, and casinos for concealed 
pistol license holders with extended training.   
WHEREAS, Governor Rick Snyder has asserted in the past that 
legislation should include an opt out so that local school boards may decide 
whether they want to permit weapons or opt out to make the school grounds 
a weapons free school zone.   
WHEREAS, Governor Rick Snyder vetoed legislation similar to Senate 
Bills 584-586 in 2012, because the bill did not allow public schools to prohibit 
persons from carrying concealed weapons on their premises. 
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED AS FOLLOWS: 
1. The Board urges lawmakers and the Governor as they debate and enact 
legislation to declare school grounds as a safety sensitive zone and to allow 
local school boards to enact policies prohibiting an individual who is licensed 
to carry a concealed pistol  from carrying a pistol, whether concealed or 
unconcealed, on school grounds, unless statutorily required to permit 
possession of firearms, such as for law enforcement personnel.  
2. That copies of this resolution be sent to Governor Rick Snyder and the 
District’s State House Representatives and State Senators. 
Adopted this 19th day of December, 2017.   
 Yes: 
 No: 
226
